EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

CERN-EP-2024-078
2024/11/12

arXiv:2404.06614v2 [physics.data-an] 11 Nov 2024

CMS-CAT-23-001

The CMS statistical analysis and combination tool:
COMBINE
The CMS Collaboration*

Abstract
This paper describes the COMBINE software package used for statistical analyses by
the CMS Collaboration. The package, originally designed to perform searches for a
Higgs boson and the combined analysis of those searches, has evolved to become the
statistical analysis tool presently used in the majority of measurements and searches
performed by the CMS Collaboration. It is not specific to the CMS experiment, and
this paper is intended to serve as a reference for users outside of the CMS Collaboration, providing an outline of the most salient features and capabilities. Readers are
provided with the possibility to run COMBINE and reproduce examples provided in
this paper using a publicly available container image. Since the package is constantly
evolving to meet the demands of ever-increasing data sets and analysis sophistication,
this paper cannot cover all details of COMBINE. However, the online documentation
referenced within this paper provides an up-to-date and complete user guide.

Published in Computing and Software for Big Science as doi:10.1007/s41781-024-00121-4.

В© 2024 CERN for the benefit of the CMS Collaboration. CC-BY-4.0 license
* See Appendix A for the list of collaboration members

The CMS statistical analysis software, COMBINE, is designed with two main features in mind.
The first is to provide a command-line interface to several common workflows used in statistical analyses in high-energy physics, and the second is to encapsulate the statistical model
using a human-readable configuration file вҖ“ herein referred to as a вҖңdatacardвҖқ. These features
are intended to ensure consistency in statistical methodology and allow for efficient investigation of potential issues, without limiting the complexity of any single analysis. Perhaps the
most important consequence is that the constructed likelihoods can be combined to produce
a greater sensitivity in searches or measurements, provided that the data sets are statistically
independent. The COMBINE analysis software is built around the ROOT [1], RooFit [2], and
RooStats [2] packages.
The statistical methods in COMBINE, many of which were developed in the LHC Higgs Combination Group [3], were originally designed for searches for a Higgs boson in proton-proton
collisions. The COMBINE tool was used in early searches [4] for, and the subsequent discovery
of, the Higgs boson [5, 6] by the CMS Collaboration. Historically, its main use case within the
CMS Collaboration was in searches for the Higgs boson, hence many of the function names and
variables used in COMBINE include вҖңHiggsвҖқ. However, the tool is not specific to these searches
or measurements of Higgs boson properties but instead is a generic tool usable for various
statistical analyses of LHC data. Since the Higgs boson discovery, many extensions have been
included that have been used for the statistical analysis in numerous publications of the CMS
Collaboration, including measurements of Higgs boson properties [7], searches for supersymmetry [8], and measurements of standard model parameters such as the top quark mass [9].
The COMBINE tool has also been used with data from the ATLAS and CMS experiments to
produce combined measurements of the Higgs boson mass, production and decay rates, and
coupling modifiers [10, 11]. Furthermore, the COMBINE software includes several routines that
provide diagnostic information regarding the statistical model and statistical analysis methods
used in such publications.
This paper provides a summary of the statistical methods and capabilities of the COMBINE
tool. For complete and up-to-date documentation, it is recommended that the reader consult
the online documentation [12].
In this paper, command line instructions are indicated by the symbol $ at the start of the line.
Square brackets [option] indicate optional commands that alter the default behavior of C OM BINE, while angular brackets <option value> indicate a value that must be specified by the
user. The color scheme for the listings contained in this paper is as follows:

Contents of a complete datacard.

$ Executable command line.
> Terminal output from the tool.
Snippet of a datacard or of Python code.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the dependencies of the software and instructions for its installation. The statistical model that is constructed by COMBINE is described
in Section 3, followed by detailed explanations of the analysis types available in the tool and
instructions on how they are implemented in Section 4. Section 5 provides instructions on the
use of physics models in COMBINE, with several examples given. This section also provides a

Installation

Aside from ROOT and RooFit, and their dependencies, several additional libraries are used
for optimized algebraic calculations, such as vectorization libraries VDT [13], the GNU scientific library GSL [14], and EIGEN [15]. Additional common libraries are used, which include
BOOST [16], and GZIP [17]. The COMBINE package may be compiled either within a CMS
software (CMSSW) environment that provides a versioned set of all dependencies, or as a standalone package. Details of different installation instructions are regularly updated in the online
documentation. A precompiled version of COMBINE is available as a D OCKER [18] container
image:
$ docker run [--platform linux/amd64] --name combine -it gitlab-registry.cern.ch/cms
,вҶ’ -cloud/combine-standalone:v9.2.0

At the time of writing this paper, the latest version of COMBINE is v9.2.0, and all of the example
datacards and the inputs necessary to run COMBINE can be found in the data/tutorials/CAT23001
directory, which is available in the container image. For statistical calculations that make use of
random sampling, the results obtained by a reader are expected to be consistent with, but not
identical to, those provided in this paper.

The statistical model

The primary task of COMBINE is to produce a statistical model, p(data; вғ—ОҰ), which encodes the
probability density for the observed data parameterized by the model parameters вғ—ОҰ, and is
subsequently used for the statistical analysis.
For numerical efficiency, it is useful to factorize the statistical model p(data; вғ—ОҰ) as much as
possible with respect to both observables and parameters. The parameter space is partitioned
into parameters of interest вғ—Вө and nuisance parameters вғ—ОҪ. Nuisance parameters are used to
model various uncertainties of theoretical and experimental origin, such as those involved in
the prediction of process cross sections or associated with luminosity calibration. Furthermore,
the observable space is partitioned into primary observables вғ—x, defined as those that appear
in components of the model containing the parameters of interest, and auxiliary observables вғ—y
that appear only in components of the model containing nuisance parameters. Each nuisance
parameter ОҪk (each element of the vector вғ—ОҪ) is paired with a corresponding auxiliary observable yk (element of вғ—y) in a component of the statistical model that provides information about
how well the nuisance parameter is known. Therefore, the statistical model constructed using
COMBINE is factorized into the primary and auxiliary components of the probability as
p(вғ—x, вғ—y; вғ—ОҰ) = p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) вҲҸ pk (yk ; ОҪk ),

(1)

k

where p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) is the probability distribution of the observables for the primary analysis, and
pk (yk ; ОҪk ) are the probability distributions of the auxiliary observables. A likelihood function is

(2)

k

where the subscript d runs over all entries in the data set and the likelihood function is used
in both Bayesian and frequentist calculations. Early searches for the Higgs boson by the CMS
collaboration reported upper limits on the Higgs boson cross section using both Bayesian and
frequentist methods [4] with COMBINE.
In COMBINE, the probability density terms associated with the auxiliary observables, pk (yk ; ОҪk ),
can also be reinterpreted as posterior distributions for the nuisance parameters, pk (ОҪk |yk ), resulting from the outcome of measurements of, or otherwise justified constraints on, the auxiliary observables yk , through the relationship
pk (ОҪk |yk ) вҲқ pk (yk ; ОҪk )ПҖk (ОҪk ),

(3)

where ПҖk (ОҪk ) are the nuisance parameter priors. This procedure provides probability distributions from which nuisance parameter values can be sampled when generating pseudo-data
sets that COMBINE uses in certain statistical calculations, as described in Section 6.3. For all
types of nuisance parameters in COMBINE, the priors are always assumed to be uniform [3] so
all of the ПҖk (ОҪk ) are constants.
Each element of вғ—x is referred to as a вҖңchannelвҖқ and is statistically independent from all other
elements of вғ—x. For example, each element of вғ—x could be the event counts in different reconstructed final states of some data set, or a continuous observable such as the invariant mass of
a pair of final state particles. The term p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in Eq. (1) becomes a product over the channels,
p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) = вҲҸ pi ( xi ; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ),

(4)

i

where i runs over the channels that comprise the primary analysis and pi is the probability
density function (pdf) for the observable xi .
The likelihood function constructed by COMBINE assumes that all yk are statistically independent from each other and from the primary observables. The user must specify the observables
and their pdfs using the datacard as described below.

Supported analysis types

A configuration file in plain text format is required for COMBINE to define the observables вғ—x
and вғ—y, and their pdfs p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) and pk (yk ; ОҪk ). This file is the datacard and is the primary input
to COMBINE. The file is also used to specify the observed data needed to define the likelihood
function, whether the analysis is a simple counting experiment or a more complex analysis
using binned or unbinned distributions of the data with histograms or parametric functions to
describe the pdfs.
The package includes a script text2workspace.py that COMBINE uses to convert the user
defined inputs (in the form of the datacard) into a binary representation of the statistical model.
The script can be run before running COMBINE itself to produce a binary ROOT file containing
the statistical model in the form of a RooFit RooWorkspace object. The script is automatically
run if the datacard is provided as the input to COMBINE. The script is run with the following
command:

The output ROOT file is given the same name as the input datacard, with the extension modified to .root unless the option -o is specified. The value of mass, a parameter widely used
in searches for new particles, is interpreted by the text2workspace.py script to specify the
datacard keyword $MASS, as described in Section 4.2.1.
It is possible to combine several datacards into a single datacard using the combineCards.py
script:
$ combineCards.py Name1=card1.txt Name2=card2.txt .... > <combined card>.txt

This allows for building complex statistical models, while retaining the readability of individual components (datacards) of the model. Multiple instances of any nuisance parameter,
sharing the same name, are treated as a single parameter of the statistical model with a single
corresponding auxiliary observable y, provided that the pdf specified for y is the same in each
instance. The rest of this section describes the preparation of datacards and associated inputs
for use with COMBINE.
The first line of the datacard is a declaration of the number of channels, imax, that are present
in the statistical model:
imax <number of channels>

For a single-channel analysis the datacard entry would be imax 1. If the value of imax is
specified as вҖң*вҖқ, COMBINE automatically determines the number of channels.
The next lines in the datacard declare the number of processes to be considered, jmax+1, and
the number of nuisance parameters, kmax:
jmax <number of processes minus one>
kmax <number of nuisance parameters or sources of systematic uncertainties>

For datacards with a single signal process, jmax is the number of background processes. Datacard lines starting with вҖң#вҖқ are ignored by COMBINE and any amount of whitespace is allowed
to separate columns and lines in the datacard. These features can be used to include descriptive
comments in the datacard. The next sections of the datacard have a different syntax depending
on whether the datacard represents a counting or shape analysis.

4.1

Counting analyses

A counting analysis is one for which the statistical model can be cast in the form of Eq. (1) with
only one primary observable, namely the total event count in a single channel that includes
multiple sources of signal and background. In the following, the primary observable is labeled
n. The probability to observe n events is described by a Poisson distribution,

P (n; О») = О»n

eвҲ’ О»
,
n!

(5)

for which the expected value, О», can be a function of one or more parameters, and represents
the total number of expected signal and background events.
Each process comes with a specified reference rate and one or more sources of uncertainty that
are referred to as вҖңsystematicвҖқ, even if they are of statistical origin. In COMBINE the definitions of each systematic uncertainty require the functional form for the probability distribution

4.1

Counting analyses

Datacard 1: Counting experiment datacard - datacard-1-counting-experiment.txt

imax 1
jmax 2
kmax 3
# A single channel - ch1 - in which 0 events are observed in data
bin
ch1
observation

# ---------bin
ch1
ch1
ch1
process
ppX
WW
tt
process

rate
1.47 0.64 0.22
# ---------lumi
lnN
1.11 1.11
1.11
xs
lnN
1.20
nWW
gmN 4
0.16
-

pk (yk ; ОҪk ) to be specified. These typically reflect calibration measurements that often result in
log-normal or gamma distributions, and are implemented in COMBINE through multiplicative
factors that propagate the effect of systematic uncertainties to the statistical model.
Datacard 1 is an example with all of these elements, representing a counting experiment with
one channel having a signal process ppX with reference rate of 1.47, two background processes
WW and tt, and three nuisance parameters that model systematic uncertainties in both the
signal and background rates. In this example, the integrated luminosity uncertainty (lumi),
assumed to be log-normal, results in an uncertainty in the expected signal rate, as well as
in the expected rates of the WW and tt backgrounds. The reference rates of the signal and
background processes are determined using simulation. A log-normal type uncertainty in the
signal rate (xs) is included to account for the uncertainty in the predicted cross section of the
signal process. A limited number of simulated events are available to determine the rate of the
WW background. The statistical uncertainty due to this limited number of simulated events
(nWW) propagates as a gamma distribution to the rate of WW.
The datacard lines immediately following the imax, jmax, and kmax lines describe the number
of events observed in each channel. Line number 5, starting with bin, defines the label that
should be used for each channel. In this example there is one channel, labeled ch1. Line number 6, starting with the word observation, indicates the number of observed events, which
is 0 in Datacard 1. For analyses in which the data are binned in a histogram, a template-based
datacard can be used instead of treating each bin of the histogram as a separate channel. There
are typically several processes that contribute to the overall signal or background expected
yields. Lines 8вҖ“11 in Datacard 1 describe the number of events expected for each channel and
process, arranged in columns. The first column in each row identifies the information expected
in the remaining columns. The number of columns beyond the first column must be equal to
the total number of processes across all channels, i.e, to the product imax(jmax + 1). Line 8
starting with bin indicates that this row specifies the channel that each column refers to. In
this case, since there is only a single channel, the number of columns in addition to the first
one is equal to the number of signal and background processes in this channel. Lines 9 and 10
starting with process indicate that these rows refer to the labels and types of the various processes. Line 9 provides a label for each process and line 10 defines the type of the process which
is either a positive number for a background process, or 0 or a negative number for a signal

process. Line 11, starting with rate, indicates the expected event yield in the specified channel
and process. This value should be considered as a reference rate for the process, assuming predetermined values for theoretical cross sections, detector acceptance and selection efficiencies,
and integrated luminosity of the data set used in the analysis. The rates can be modified by the
parameters of the statistical model вғ—ОҰ. In the simplest statistical model available in COMBINE, a
single parameter of interest, the signal strength r, multiplies the rate of every signal process in
the datacard as described in Section 5.
The remaining lines 13вҖ“15 contain the description of systematic uncertainties that are to be
included in the statistical model. Each of these systematic uncertainties is associated with a
dedicated nuisance parameter ОҪ. The systematic uncertainties section of the datacard is structured as follows:

вҖў The first column indicates the name used in the binary representation of the statistical model for identifying the uncertainty. This is the name given to the RooFit
RooRealVar object that encodes the corresponding nuisance parameter in the statistical model.
вҖў The second column identifies the effect of the associated nuisance parameter and
the form of p(y; ОҪ) to be included in the statistical model. For gamma type nuisance
parameters, this column has two entries, which is explained in the following.
вҖў Finally, there are columns describing the effect of the systematic uncertainty on the
rate of each process in each channel. The number of columns is the same as for the
previous lines declaring channels, processes, and rates. If a process is unaffected by
a nuisance parameter, the corresponding column entry for that nuisance parameter
is вҖң-вҖқ.
The different types of systematic uncertainties that can be included in the datacard for counting
experiments are shown in Table 1. Each of these types results in an associated probability term
p(y; ОҪ) which is either a normal distribution,

N (y; ОҪ, ПғОҪ ) =

вҲҡ

ПғОҪ 2ПҖ

Poisson distribution,

P (y; ОҪ) = ОҪy
or uniform distribution,

(

U (y; a, b) =

bвҲ’ a

e

вҲ’ 12



ОҪвҲ’y
ПғОҪ

2

,

(6)

eвҲ’ ОҪ
,
y!

(7)

if y вҲҲ [ a, b],
otherwise.

(8)

Equation (6), aside from being used directly for normally distributed observables, is also the
building block for log-normally distributed observables, as discussed below. The Poisson distribution of y in Eq. (7) becomes a gamma distribution О“(ОҪ; y) when the observed value of y is
substituted and the expression is interpreted as a likelihood function,
О“(ОҪ; y) = ОҪy

eвҲ’ ОҪ
.
y!

(9)

In Datacard 1 there are three sources of systematic uncertainty that affect one or more processes. Each of these lines results in a single nuisance parameter ОҪ, auxiliary observable y,
and associated probability density p(y; ОҪ) being included in the statistical model. The nuisance

4.2

Shape analyses

parameters are ОҪlumi , ОҪxs , and ОҪnWW with corresponding auxiliary observables ylumi , yxs , and
ynWW .
The first two uncertainties are log-normal types [19], detailed below using the integrated luminosity L uncertainty as an example. The rates of signal and background are typically proportional to L. The rates defined in the datacard are normalized to a reference value L0 , which
represents the nominal value of the integrated luminosity. Deviations from this reference value
are expressed through the dimensionless quantity f = L/L0 . An estimate fЛҶ is available as a random sample from a pdf p( fЛҶ; f ). The probability distribution p( fЛҶ; f ) is log-normal, so that the
sampling distribution of ln fЛҶ is normal, with mean equal to ln f . The standard deviation of ln fЛҶ
can be judiciously written as ln Оә, where Оә is a positive constant that is specified in the datacard.
The nuisance parameter ОҪ that controls the systematic uncertainty in the integrated luminosity
is then not considered to be L itself, but rather is defined as ОҪ = ln f / ln Оә from which it follows that the multiplicative factor in the rate corresponding to luminosity is f (ОҪ) = Оә ОҪ . The
observable y is then a sample from p(y; ОҪ), which is normal with mean ОҪ as in Eq. (6), and unity
standard deviation. The log-normal type is typically used when f is positive by definition, as
is the case with the integrated luminosity, and p( fЛҶ; f ) continuously approaches zero as fЛҶ вҶ’ 0.
The first uncertainty in Datacard 1, lumi in line 13, represents the uncertainty in the measured
integrated luminosity of the data set. The effect of this uncertainty is 11% on the rate of the
ppX, WW, and tt processes. This means that the rates of all three processes are multiplied by a
factor of 1.11 when the nuisance parameter ОҪlumi is set to +1, and by a factor of 1/1.11 = 0.90
when it is set to вҲ’1. The log-normal type is also useful when a systematic uncertainty is taken
to be a factor of Оә, also often expressed as percentage uncertainty of Оә вҲ’ 1. This means that high
tails of the distribution of fЛҶ above Оә f and low tails below f /Оә each contain equal probability
of roughly 16%. The second uncertainty in Datacard 1, xs in line 14, represents an uncertainty
in the calculation of the theoretical cross section of the signal process. This uncertainty has an
effect of 20% on the signal rate while leaving the background processes unaffected.
The gamma type uncertainty is used to model uncertainties in the rate of a particular process
due to the limited sample size used to predict the rate. The third uncertainty in Datacard 1, nWW
in line 15, is a gamma type uncertainty. This line in the datacard specifies that the reference rate
of the WW background process is determined from a sample of 4 simulated events, each with an
event weight of 0.16.
The full statistical model that COMBINE produces by default using Datacard 1 is given in Section 5.

4.2

Shape analyses

A shape analysis is defined as one that incorporates one or more primary observables, beyond a
single number of events, in the statistical model of Eq. (1). The datacard has to be supplemented
with two extensions: a new block of lines defining the pdfs for the observables related to each
process in each channel, and a block of lines defining systematic uncertainties that affect those
pdfs.
The pdf can be parametric or template-based, depending on the inputs provided by the user. In
the former case, the parametric pdf for each process has to be provided as a RooFit object that
is derived from the RooAbsPdf class. These objects must be contained in a RooWorkspace object that is identified as an input workspace in the datacard. In the latter case, for each channel,
histograms must be provided to represent the pdf for each process binned in the observable
for that channel. These must be either ROOT TH1 or RooDataHist histogram objects, for

Table 1: Available uncertainty types for counting experiments. The second and third columns
indicate the entries for the datacard required to specify the type, and the relative effect on
the yield of each process in each channel. The fourth and fifth columns indicate the resulting
multiplicative factor by which COMBINE scales the normalization of the relevant process in
the specified channel, and the term p(y; ОҪ) that is included in Eq. (1). Finally, the last column
indicates the default values of ОҪ and y. Where relevant, the value of Оә вҲ’ 1 can be interpreted as
the relative uncertainty in the process normalization in a given channel.
Uncertainty type
Log-normal

Asymmetric

Directive

Inputs

Multiplicative factor, f (ОҪ)

p(y; ОҪ)

Default values

lnN

kappa

ОәОҪ

N (y; ОҪ, 1)

ОҪ=y=0

N (y; ОҪ, 1)

ОҪ=y=0

Оә Down
kappaDown,
lnN

log-normal

Оә
kappaUp

eОҪK (

вҲ’ОҪ


Up ОҪ

if ОҪ < вҲ’0.5,

if ОҪ > 0.5,

Оә Down ,Оә Up ,ОҪ

) otherwise.вӢҶ

Log-uniform

lnU

kappa

ОәОҪ

U (y, 1/Оә, Оә )

ОҪ = y = 21 (Оә + 1/Оә )

Gamma

gmN

N, alphaвҖ 

ОҪ/N

P (y; ОҪ)

ОҪ = N + 1, y = N вҖЎ

вӢҶ K Оә Down , Оә Up , ОҪ = 1 4 ln Оә Up /Оә Down  + ln Оә Up Оә Down  48ОҪ5 вҲ’ 40ОҪ3 + 15ОҪ ensures that the multiplicative factor and its

first and second derivatives are continuous for all values of ОҪ, and reduces to a log-normal for Оә Down = 1/Оә Up .
вҖ  The rate value for the affected process must be equal to NОұ.
вҖЎ The default value for the nuisance parameter is set to the mean of a gamma distribution with parameters Оә = N + 1, О» = 1,
as defined in Ref. [20].

analyses in which the data are binned, or RooDataSet objects when the data are unbinned.
As with the counting experiment, the total reference rate of a given process must be identified
in the rate line of the datacard. However, there are special options for shape-based analyses:

вҖў A value of -1 in the rate line indicates that COMBINE should calculate the rate from
the input TH1 object using the TH1::Integral method, or the RooDataSet or
RooDataHist using the RooAbsData::sumEntries method.
вҖў For parametric shapes defined as RooAbsPdf objects, if a parameter is found in the
input workspace with the name pdfname norm, the rate is multiplied by the value
of that parameter.
For shape analyses, the statistical model constructed by COMBINE is factorized where possible
into normalization and shape terms that provide significant gains in computation time. Examples of this factorization can be seen in Eqs. (11) and (18).
4.2.1

Template-based shape analyses

The majority of statistical analyses performed by the CMS Collaboration are template-based
analyses. This choice of analysis is particularly common when there is no physically motivated
parametric function to describe the pdfs for the primary observables. Example analyses include
the observations of Higgs boson decays to bottom quarks [21], which uses the output of a deep
neural network, and the production of four top quarks in proton-proton collisions [22], which
uses boosted decision trees to construct the observable.
A template-based shape analysis is one in which the observable in each channel is partitioned
into NB bins. The number of events nb in the data that fall within each bin b (with b running

4.2

Shape analyses

from 1 to NB ) is considered as an independent Poisson process. The observable x in Eq. (4)
in each channel is replaced by the set of observables nb for the purpose of constructing the
statistical model in COMBINE. For each channel, COMBINE constructs the term p( x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) as a
product of Poisson probabilities, yielding
NB

p( x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) = вҲҸ P (nb ; О»b (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ)) ,

(10)

b =1

where the total expectation for a given bin is denoted as О»b , and the observed event count in
data in a given channel and bin is denoted by nb . In the case of NB = 1, Eq. (10) reduces to
the pdf that COMBINE constructs for a single counting analysis, cf. Eq. (5). For each channel,
histograms must be provided that specify, for each bin, the observed data and the expected
yield for each process that contributes. These can be provided as either ROOT TH1 objects
or RooFit RooDataHist objects. Within each channel, all histograms must use the same
partitioning (binning) of the observable. When using RooDataHist objects, the observable
name must be the same for all processes within that channel. An explicit check is made to
ensure the normalization of the data histogram corresponds to the number of observed events
and that the normalization of the histograms matches the rates provided in the datacard in each
channel.
Template-based analysis datacards contain one or more rows in the form:
shapes <process> <channel> <file> <histogram> [<
,вҶ’ histogram_systematic_uncertainty_variation>]

In this datacard line, process is any of the process names or вҖң*вҖқ for all processes, or data obs
for the observed data, and channel is any of the channel names, or вҖң*вҖқ for all channels. The
value of file gives the name of the ROOT file. The labels histogram and histogram s
ystematic uncertainty variation identify either the names of the TH1 objects or the
RooWorkspace and RooDataHist objects within that file. Several keywords in the datacard
line are reserved for automatic substitution when constructing the statistical model:

вҖў $PROCESS is substituted with each process label or data obs for the observed data.
вҖў $CHANNEL is substituted with each channel label.
вҖў $SYSTEMATIC is substituted with the name of each nuisance parameter (with an
additional suffix Up or Down) that appears in the lines at the end of the datacard.
вҖў $MASS is replaced with a mass value, which is passed as a command line option.
These lines are interpreted sequentially in the order they appear in the datacard, which allows
for multiple instructions with wild card characters and keywords to define the pdfs for each
process across the channels. The $MASS keyword was originally intended to allow for a single
datacard to be used for different mass hypotheses of the Higgs boson mH . In analyses such as
the search for H вҶ’ WW вҲ— вҶ’ 2в„“2ОҪ [23], a different set of histograms for the signal at specific values of mH are chosen by specifying this keyword on the command line. In the H вҶ’ ZZ вҲ— вҶ’ 4в„“
and H вҶ’ ОіОі analyses, this keyword makes it possible to measure mH using the MH parameter,
which can be varied continuously [10]. This keyword is useful in searches for new particles
whose masses are not known. The COMBINE package supports arbitrary user-defined keywords in the datacard, the values of which can be set at runtime with the command line. This
is particularly useful for analyses in which the probability distributions depend on more than
one parameter.
For each channel, the expected value for the total rate in a given bin b is expressed as a sum

p

where the functions Пүbp (вғ—ОҪ) are the number of expected events for a process in a given bin
b, M p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) is the overall multiplicative factor representing the effects of the statistical model
parameters on the total rate of a given process, and Eb (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ), discussed at the end of this section,
accounts for the statistical uncertainties arising from limited simulated or collision data used
to populate the histogram. The value of О»b (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) is restricted to be positive for any values of
the parameters.
The functions Пүbp (вғ—ОҪ) are derived using the histograms provided by the user that represent the
expected distribution for a given process, for the nominal model and for alternates in which
a particular nuisance parameter is varied. Dropping the process labels henceforth, the nominal bin contents are denoted by Пүb0 . For each shape systematic uncertainty s, two additional
histograms are specified, Пүbs,+ and Пүbs,вҲ’ , typically corresponding to the distributions for the
values ОҪs = +1 and ОҪs = вҲ’1, respectively. The datacard must include an additional line in the
systematic uncertainties block with the form:
<name> shape[N] <effect_p_i>

where effect p i is a sequence of values that indicate the effect of the uncertainty in each
process p and channel i in the datacard. Each value in the sequence can be вҖң-вҖқ or 0 for no
effect, or 1 to indicate that the process is affected. Values different from 1 can be specified to
indicate that the histograms provided represent the expected distribution for other values of the
associated nuisance parameter ОҪs . For example, a value of 0.5 would indicate to COMBINE that
the alternative histograms correspond to values of ОҪs = Вұ2 as is illustrated for the systematic
uncertainty modelled by the nuisance parameter sigma in Datacard 2.
The alternative histograms can be different from the nominal histogram both in the fractional
content of each bin, f b = Пүb / вҲ‘bвҖІ ПүbвҖІ , and in their normalization. For the latter, the term
M p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in Eq. (11) contains an additional asymmetric log-normal multiplicative factor, as
described in Table 1, where the values of Оә Up and Оә Down are defined by
+/вҲ’

Оә Up/Down =

вҲ‘ b Пүb
.
вҲ‘b Пүb0

(12)

For the former, the user can choose between either parameterizing the variation due to each
nuisance parameter directly in terms of the fractional bin contents, f b , or their logarithms,
ln( f b ), by specifying either shape or shapeN in the systematic line of the datacard, respectively. The functions for the fractions are given by
f b (вғ—ОҪ) = f b0 + вҲ‘ F (ОҪs , Оҙbs,+ , Оҙbs,вҲ’ , Пөs ),

(13)

s

if using the shape algorithm or

s,+

s,вҲ’

f b (вғ—ОҪ) = e(ln( f b )+вҲ‘s F(ОҪs ,вҲҶb ,вҲҶb ,Пөs )) ,

(14)

if using the shapeN algorithm, respectively, where f b0 = Пүb0 / вҲ‘bвҖІ Пүb0вҖІ , Оҙbs,Вұ = f bs,Вұ вҲ’ f b0 , вҲҶs,b Вұ =
ln( f bs,Вұ ) вҲ’ ln( f b0 ), and the subscript s iterates over each systematic uncertainty. Similarly to the
nominal fractions, the values of f bs,Вұ are determined by f bs,Вұ = Пүbs,Вұ / вҲ‘bвҖІ Пүbs,вҖІВұ . The shape algorithm is typically used when the variation due to a systematic uncertainty is relatively small

4.2

Shape analyses

Datacard 2: Template analysis datacard - datacard-2-template-analysis.txt

imax 1
jmax 1
kmax 4
# --------------shapes * * template-analysis-datacard-input.root $PROCESS
,вҶ’ $PROCESS_$SYSTEMATIC
# --------------bin
ch1
observation 85
# -----------------------------bin
ch1
ch1
process
signal
background
process

rate

100
# -------------------------------lumi
lnN
1.1
1.0
bgnorm
lnN
1.3
alpha shape

# uncertainty in the background template.
sigma shape
0.5
# uncertainty in the signal template.

compared to the contents in each bin, while the shapeN algorithm is used when a systematic
uncertainties results in large variations. This is due to the fact that the latter yields a smooth
function close to zero when the fractional bin contents are small.
The function F depends on a set of scaling factors, Пөs . These are assumed to be unity by default,
but may be set to different values, e.g., if the values of Пүbs,Вұ correspond to ОҪs = Вұ X, then
Пөs = 1/X. The function F is defined as
пЈұ

1 вҖІ
1 +
+
вҲ’
вҲ’
вҖІ
пЈҙ
пЈІ 2 ОҪ (Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ ) + 8 (Оҙ + Оҙ ) J (ОҪ) , вҲ’q < ОҪ < q;
F (ОҪ, Оҙ+ , ОҙвҲ’ , Пө) = ОҪвҖІ Оҙ+ ,
(15)
ОҪвҖІ вүҘ q;
пЈҙ
пЈі вҖІ вҲ’
вҖІ
вҲ’ОҪ Оҙ ,
ОҪ вүӨ вҲ’q;
where ОҪвҖІ = ОҪПө, ОҪ = ОҪвҖІ /q, and J (ОҪ) = (3ОҪ5 вҲ’ 10ОҪ3 + 15ОҪ). The minimum value of Пө for a given
process in a given channel is q = min(Пөs ). These functions ensure that the fractions and their
first and second derivatives are continuous for all values of ОҪ. A discussion of the different functions that are commonly used for parameterization in template-based analyses can be found in
Ref. [24]. For each shape[N] systematic uncertainty line in the datacard corresponding to an
uncertainty s, an auxiliary observable ys and its probability distribution p(ys ; ОҪs ) = N (ys ; ОҪs , 1)
are included in the statistical model in Eq. (1). The default values are ОҪs = ys = 0.
Datacard 2 is an example of a template-based analysis in which the observable x is the output of a multivariate analysis (MVA) discriminator. The histograms defining the distributions
of all processes, and their variations due to systematic uncertainties, are contained in a single
ROOT file named template-analysis-datacard-input.root. Datacard 2 contains two
processes, signal and background. Line 5 specifies the mapping between the histograms
in the ROOT file (as shown in Table 2) and the processes defined in the datacard. Lines 17
and 18 provide the definition of systematic uncertainties that affect the probability distribution of the observable for the different processes. In the example, two such uncertainties are
listed, one, alpha, that affects only the background process, and the other, sigma, that affects
only the signal process. Any text beyond the number of columns expected in these lines is

ignored by COMBINE and can be used to include descriptions of the systematic uncertainties
in the datacard. Within the ROOT file, two histograms for each systematic uncertainty are
provided, which represent the probability distributions and rates of the signal and background
processes when the associated nuisance parameters are varied. In the ROOT file, these are TH1
objects named background alphaUp and background alphaDown, and signal sigmaUp
and signal sigmaDown. Table 2 shows the TH1 inputs contained in the ROOT file used in
Datacard 2.
Table 2: TH1 objects contained in the template-analysis-datacard-input.root file
used in Datacard 2. The histograms used to determine the effects of the sigma parameter
on the signal distribution correspond to twice the variation resulting from the systematic uncertainty modelled by the parameter.
Object name

Description

data obs

Histogram containing the observed number of events in
each bin of the analysis.

signal

Histogram containing the expected yields Пүb0 of the signal
process in each bin of the analysis.

background

Histogram containing the expected yields Пүb0 of the background process in each bin of the analysis.

signal sigmaUp,
signal sigmaDown

Histograms containing the expected yields of the signal
process for each bin in the analysis when the nuisance
parameter sigma is set to вҲ’2 (Down) ПүbвҲ’ , and +2 (Up)
Пүb+ , and all other nuisance parameters are set to their default values.

background alphaUp,
background alphaDown

Histograms containing the expected yields of the background process for each bin in the analysis when the nuisance parameter alpha is set to вҲ’1 (Down) ПүbвҲ’ , and +1
(Up) Пүb+ , and all other nuisance parameters are set to their
default values.

Figure 1 shows the histograms used to determine the expected yield Пүb0 and yields expected
for the variations of the systematic uncertainties Пүb+ and ПүbвҲ’ for the signal and background
processes. The histogram for the observed data is also shown.
The term Eb (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in Eq. (11) accounts for the statistical uncertainties in the histograms used
to determine Пүbp . When the histograms are provided using TH1 objects, these terms can be
included using the following line at the end of the datacard:
<channel> autoMCStats <threshold>

The first string channel should give the name of the channels in the datacard for which these
statistical uncertainties should be included. The wildcard вҖң*вҖқ indicates that this should apply to all channels in the datacard. The value of threshold should be set to a value greater
than or equal to zero to include the uncertainties. This value sets the threshold on the effective
number of unweighted events above which the uncertainty is modeled with a single nuisance
parameter for each bin following the BarlowвҖ“Beeston procedure outlined in Ref. [25], using
the simplifying approximation introduced in Ref. [26]. This procedure is used to improve the

4.2

Shape analyses

CMS
Events / 0.1 units

background

signal

alphaUp
alphaDown
sigmaUp
sigmaDown
data_obs

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
x = MVA output

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: Histograms used to define the pdfs for Datacard 2. The red and blue histograms show
the nominal yields in each bin Пүb0 for the background and signal processes, respectively. The
dotted and dashed lines show the histograms that provide the values of Пүb+ and ПүbвҲ’ , respectively for each of the systematic uncertainties that modify the shape of the signal and background pdfs. The red dashed and dotted lines are associated with the effect of the nuisance
parameter alpha on the background process, while the blue dashed and dotted lines are associated with the effect of the nuisance parameter sigma affecting the signal process. The black
points show the observed number of events in data in each bin. The error bars indicate the
statistical uncertainty.

computational performance without introducing significant impact on the accuracy of the results. Below the threshold, an individual nuisance parameter for each process is created. This
threshold improves the computational stability of subsequent statistical routines by reducing
the total number of parameters of the statistical model, while maintaining a reasonably accurate description of the statistical uncertainties in the histograms. For each nuisance parameter,
a corresponding probability distribution for y is included when building the model in Eq. (1),
the form of which is determined by this effective number.
When threshold is set to a number of effective unweighted events greater than or equal to
zero, denoted nthreshold , the following algorithm is applied to each bin b:
0 and uncertainties e of each background process p in the bin. Пү
1. Sum the yields Пүbp
bp
tot =
q
0 , and e
вҲ‘ p вҲҲ bkg Пүbp
вҲ‘ p вҲҲ bkg e2bp . The values of ebp are obtained using the TH1::Ge
b,tot =

tBinError method.
2. If eb,tot = 0, the bin is skipped and no associated nuisance parameters are created.
eff = Пү 2 /e2 , rounded to
3. The effective number of unweighted events is defined as Пүb,tot
b,tot b,tot
the nearest integer.
eff determines the functional form of E (вғ—
eff
threshold , a single
The value of Пүb,tot
b Вө, ОҪ ). If Пүb,tot > n
auxiliary observable y is included in the statistical model that is normally distributed with
p(y; ОҪ) = N (y; ОҪ, 1). The nuisance parameter ОҪ determines the value of Eb ,

Eb (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ, ОҪ) = ОҪ

вҲ‘ e2bp M2p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ)

! 21
,

(16)

p

where вғ—ОҪ here represents all of the other nuisance parameters in the statistical model. The default
eff вүӨ nthreshold , a vector of auxiliary observables
values in COMBINE are ОҪ = y = 0. If instead Пүb,tot
вғ—y with one entry per process is included in the statistical model. For processes that have a
2 /e2 less than nthreshold , the observable is Poisson distributed
number of effective events Пүbp
pb
with p(yОұ ; ОҪОұ ) = P (yОұ ; ОҪОұ ). For processes with w2bp /e2pb вүҘ nthreshold , the observable is normally
distributed with p(y ОІ ; ОҪОІ ) = N (y ОІ ; ОҪОІ , 1). The nuisance parameters determine the value of Eb ,


ОҪОұ
вҲ’ 1 ПүbОұ MОұ (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) + вҲ‘ ОҪОІ ebОІ MОІ (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ),
(17)
Eb (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ, вғ—ОҪОұ , вғ—ОҪОІ ) = вҲ‘
yОұ
Оұ
ОІ
where the indices Оұ and ОІ run over processes for which the auxiliary observables are Poisson
and normally distributed, respectively. The default values of ОҪОІ = y ОІ are zero, while the default
values of yОұ and ОҪОұ are set to the effective number of unweighted events in the TH1 histogram
0 .
objects used to evaluate Пүbp
4.2.2

Parametric shape analysis

A parametric shape analysis is one that uses analytic functions rather than histograms to describe the pdfs of continuous primary observables. In these cases, the primary observable x in
each channel can be univariate or multivariate. For example, in the measurements of Higgs boson cross sections in the four-lepton decay mode, the primary observable is bivariate composed
of the invariant mass of the four leptons and a kinematic discriminator designed to separate the
signal and background processes [27]. The data in parametric shape analyses can be binned, as

4.2

Shape analyses

in the case of template-based analyses, or unbinned. Uncertainties affecting the expected distributions of the signal and background processes can be implemented directly as uncertainties
in the parameters of those analytical functions.
Datacard 3 defines a parametric analysis with a single channel and two processes: one signal
process and one background process. The datacard is similar to what would be used in a search
for a narrow resonance over a smooth background, such as in the search for Higgs boson decays
to muon pairs [28]. The primary observable is the invariant mass m of the decay products, and
the signal distribution depends on the hypothesized mass of the resonance, mH . The systematic
uncertainties include uncertainties that affect the expected rates of the signal and background
processes, and uncertainties in the parameters that describe the signal and background pdfs.
For datacards describing parametric-based analyses, the term p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in Eq. (1) is constructed
in COMBINE as,
О» p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) f p ( x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ)
p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) = вҲ‘
,
(18)
вҲ‘ p О» p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ)
p
where f p ( x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) are the pdfs for each process p for a given channel with primary observable x. These pdfs can depend on both the parameters of interest and the nuisance parameters. In parametric analyses, for a specific data
set with n entries { xd } where d runs from 1


to n, a Poisson probability P n; вҲ‘ p О» p (вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) is included in the likelihood function in Eq. (2).
The Poisson parameters О» p depend only on the parameters of interest and any nuisance parameters affecting the rate of a given process. These parameters are products of multiplicative factors of the form given in Table 1 and any RooAbsReal object named pdfname norm
found in the input RooWorkspace, as described in Section 4.2. When the data are provided
as binned data sets with RooDataHist objects, the continuous observable x is replaced by
a sequence of discrete bin centres xb , and the pdfs are evaluated at these values. If the bins
are relatively narrow, this approximation provides a good estimate of the probability density.
When this approximation is not accurate, the COMBINE package provides a custom class named
RooParametricShapeBinPdf that can wrap any univariate RooAbsPdf object such that
f p ( xb ; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) =

Z
bin b

f p ( x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) dx.

(19)

The datacard lines for parametric shape analyses need two names to identify the RooFit object
representing the pdf for a given process in each channel, separated by a colon in the following
format:
shapes <process> <channel> <file> <workspace_name>:<pdf_name>

The label workspace name identifies the input workspace, which is a RooWorkspace object
containing the RooFit objects, while the second label pdf name identifies the RooAbsPdf
or RooAbsData contained therein. The pdfs f p for each process p are defined by the objects
identified with pdf name.
Lines 5вҖ“7 indicate the name of the input ROOT file parametric-analysis-datacard-i
nput.root that contains an input workspace (w), with RooAbsPdf objects named sig and
bkg defining the pdfs for the signal and background processes, respectively. The contents of
this workspace are summarized in Table 3.
There is a single RooRealVar object named m in the workspace, which represents the primary
observable for the analysis. The RooDataSet object named data obs provides the observed

imax 1
jmax 1
kmax 2
# --------------shapes data_obs
bin1 parametric-analysis-datacard-input.root w:
,вҶ’ data_obs
shapes signal
bin1 parametric-analysis-datacard-input.root w:sig
shapes background bin1 parametric-analysis-datacard-input.root w:bkg
# --------------bin
bin1
observation
567
# --------------bin
bin1
bin1
process
signal background
process

rate

# --------------lumi
lnN
1.1
sigma
param 1.0
0.1
alpha
flatParam
bkg_norm
flatParam

Table
3:
Contents
of
the
RooWorkspace
object
contained
in
the
parametric-analysis-datacard-input.root file providing inputs for the parametric
analysis datacard.
Object name

Type

Description

m

RooRealVar

The invariant mass observable.

data obs

RooDataSet

Invariant mass of each event in the observed data.

sig

RooGaussian

Normal pdf describing the probability distribution of
the invariant mass for the signal process.

bkg

RooExponential

Exponential pdf describing the probability distribution
of the invariant mass for the background process.

MH

RooRealVar

Mean of the signal pdf.

sigma

RooRealVar

Standard deviation of the signal pdf.

alpha

RooRealVar

Slope parameter for the background pdf.

bkg norm

RooRealVar

Rate multiplier for the total background contribution.

data. In this datacard the number of events observed in data, as indicated in line 10, is specified
as 567, so COMBINE expects this data set to contain 567 entries, each with its own value of the
RooRealVar object m.
Figure 2 shows the pdfs for the signal and background processes, and the distribution of m
in observed data. The data are unbinned and treated as such in COMBINE; the binning is
performed exclusively for visualization. The effects of varying the sigma and alpha nuisance

4.2

Shape analyses

parameters on the pdfs for the signal and background processes are also shown.

Events / 0.4 GeV

CMS

110

background
signal

120

alpha (-0.09,-0.11)
sigma (0.7,1.3)
data_obs

130
140
x = m (GeV)

150

Figure 2: Distributions of the invariant mass observable for the signal and background processes defined in Datacard 3. The red and blue curves show the parametric functions used to
define the probability density for the invariant mass for the background and signal processes,
respectively, at the default values of the nuisance parameters, normalized to their expected total yields. The blue shaded band shows the variation of the signal pdf when sigma is varied
between 0.7 and 1.3. The red shaded region shows the variation of the background pdf when
alpha is varied within 10% of its default value of вҲ’0.1. The black points show the distribution
of the observed data. The binning and error bars are only for visualization and neither are used
by COMBINE to build the likelihood function.
In this datacard, the signal process is parameterized as a normal distribution with a mean given
by the hypothesized signal mass value MH. This variable is used in COMBINE when interpreting
the command line argument value --mass. The value of the hypothesized signal mass will be
fixed to the value specified by the --mass option unless MH is specifically listed as a parameter
of interest in the physics model (see Section 5). The background is an exponential distribution
p(m) вҲқ eОұm , with a single nuisance parameter defined in the workspace as a RooRealVar
object named alpha. The workspace also contains a nuisance parameter named bkg norm
that multiplies the background rate.
Parametric systematic uncertainties are included using datacard lines with the syntax:
<name> param <V> [<U>, <-UDown/+UUp>]

These datacard lines directly encode uncertainties in the parameters of the signal and background pdfs. For each of these lines, an additional term N (y; ОҪ, u), is included when constructing the statistical model in Eq. (1). The default values for y and ОҪ are set to the value V and
u is the value of U specified in the datacard line. Line 18 of Datacard 3 indicates that there
is a RooRealVar object describing the parameter sigma, contained in the workspace, that is
associated with a normal distribution with mean specified by V=1.0 and standard deviation
specified by U=0.1. Asymmetric uncertainties in the parameter can be defined by using the
syntax -UDown/+UUp= вҲ’1/+1 standard deviations in the relevant datacard line. The corresponding term p(y; ОҪ) in the statistical model constructed by COMBINE is a dimidated Gaus-

sian distribution [29]. It is possible to include linear correlations between the parameters by
first diagonalizing the covariance among them and encoding the resulting linear combinations
of parameters as the nuisance parameters that are declared in the datacard.
To specify that a parameter should be assigned a uniform distribution for p(y; ОҪ), the datacard
line should be:
<name> flatParam

The range of allowed parameter values is determined from the RooRealVar methods getMin
and getMax, and the default value of the parameter is determined from the getVal method.
Lines 19 and 20 in Datacard 3 indicate that there are two such parameters. These lines do not
count towards the value of kmax since for frequentist calculations they can be dropped from
the datacard with no effect on the results. The same is not true for Bayesian calculations so it is
recommended to include these lines in parametric shape analyses.

4.3

Rate parameters

Additional multiplicative scale factors can be introduced in the statistical model that directly
modify the rate of a given process, in a given channel, by including additional lines in the
datacard for any type of analysis, using the following syntax:
<name> rateParam <channel> <process> <initial_value> [<min>,<max>]

A nuisance parameter is included in the statistical model that multiplies the rate of that particular process in the given channel by its value. The default value for this parameter is set
to the value indicated by initial value. The values of min and max can be used to set a
range for this parameter. The same rateParam nuisance parameter can be attached to multiple channels/processes by using a wild card. For example, вҖң*вҖқ matches any process, while
вҖңQCD *вҖқ matches any process whose name begins with вҖңQCD вҖқ. Repeating the same datacard
line with different channel/process values is also supported. A uniform probability distribution within the range given is included in the statistical model if an additional flatParam
datacard line is included for that parameter.
In addition to direct rate modifiers, modifiers that are functions of other parameters can be
included using the following syntax:
<name> rateParam <channel> <process> <formula> <args>

where formula is a string with the syntax used by the ROOT packageвҖҷs TFormula, and args
is a comma separated list of the arguments for the formula. Any nuisance parameter can be
included in the formula.
Datacard 4 is an example datacard that uses the rateParam directive to implement an ABCD
background estimation method. In the ABCD method, three samples of the data, labeled B, C,
and D, that are depleted in signal contributions, are defined using two independent selection
variables to estimate one or more background contributions to the signal-enriched data sample
labeled A. In Ref. [30], the ABCD method is used to determine the contribution of the QCD
multijet background using the missing transverse momentum and an isolation variable based
on the measured energy around the electron in each event. The expected contribution from
the QCD multijet background in sample A is estimated using the observed yields in samples
B, C, and D by assuming the ratio of yields between samples A and B is the same as that
between C and D. An example ABCD analysis can be constructed as a four channel counting

imax 4
jmax 1
kmax *
# ------bin
B
C
D
A
observation 50
100
500

# ------bin
B
C
D
A
A
process
bkg
bkg
bkg
bkg
sig
process

rate

# ------lumi
lnN 1.02
eff
lnN 1.01
alpha rateParam A bkg (@0*@1/@2) beta,gamma,delta
beta rateParam B bkg 50
gamma rateParam C bkg 100
delta rateParam D bkg 500

analysis in COMBINE, as described in Datacard 4: The parameters beta, gamma, and delta
described by lines 16вҖ“18 are simple rate modifiers, ОІ, Оі, and Оҙ, that directly scale the yields of
the bkg process in channels B, C, and D, respectively. The parameter alpha is determined by
the formula Оұ = ОІОі/Оҙ, as defined on line 15 of the datacard. The yield of the bkg process in
channel A is scaled accordingly by this formula.
Finally, any pre-existing RooAbsReal object inside a ROOT file containing a RooWorkspace
can be imported into the statistical model using the following syntax:
<name> rateParam <channel> <process> <rootfile>:<workspacename>

The value of name should correspond to the name of the RooAbsReal object inside the RooWo
rkspace. This allows for arbitrary functions of the statistical model parameters to be used to
determine the rate of a particular process in a given channel.

Physics models

The COMBINE package supports the construction and association of parameters of interest to
the different signal processes declared in the datacard. This is achieved by defining the parameters of interest and how they affect the signal processes in a Python file: the physics model. Different physics models can be used with the same datacard, which facilitates the reinterpretation
of a statistical analysis in terms of different parameters of interest [31]. To specify the physics
model to use in the statistical model construction, the option -P in text2workspace.py
should indicate the Python file and the model defined therein:
$ text2workspace.py <datacard.txt> -P HiggsAnalysis.CombinedLimit.<PythonFile>:<
,вҶ’ modelInstance> [--PO <options>]

The PythonFile should be contained in the python/ subdirectory of the COMBINE package.
The default physics model is one for which the rate of every signal process is multiplied by a
common factor r, which is the only parameter of interest. In this model вғ—Вө = r. The default

model is used if the -P option is not specified.
With the physics model defined, it is now possible to fully determine the statistical model for
an input datacard. The statistical model created by COMBINE for Datacard 1 when using the
default physics model is defined as
p(n, вғ—y; r, вғ—ОҪ) =

О»(r, вғ—ОҪ)n вҲ’О»(r,вғ—ОҪ) 1 вҲ’(ОҪlumi вҲ’ylumi )2 вҲ’(ОҪxs вҲ’yxs )2 (ОҪnWW )ynWW вҲ’ОҪnWW
e
,
e
e
e
n!
2ПҖ
ynWW !

(20)

where the function О»(r, вғ—ОҪ) is given by
ОҪ
О»(r, вғ—ОҪ) = r 1.47 (1.11)ОҪlumi (1.2)ОҪxs + 0.22 (1.11)ОҪlumi + 0.64 (1.11)ОҪlumi nWW .

(21)

The observable values for the data are set to n = 0, ylumi = yxs = 0, and ynWW = 4.
Generic physics models can be implemented by writing a Python class that defines the parameters of interest and defines how the signal (and background) yields depend on these
parameters. There are numerous example physics models provided in the COMBINE package in python/PhysicsModel.py and other Python files within the same directory. In the
PhysicsModel:floatingXSHiggs physics model, the signal processes expected in the datacard correspond to the four dominant Higgs boson production modes at the LHC: gluon fusion,
vector boson fusion, and Higgs boson production associated with a vector boson or a pair of
top quarks. Their rates are modified by separate scaling parameters; r ggH, r qqH, r VH (or
r WH and r ZH), and r ttH as defined in the following block of code:
def doParametersOfInterest(self):
"""Create parameters of interest (POIs) and other parameters, and define the POI
,вҶ’ set."""
# --- Signal Strength as only POI --if "ggH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_ggH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.ggHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.ggHRange[1]))
if "qqH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_qqH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.qqHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.qqHRange[1]))
if "VH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_VH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.VHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.VHRange [1]))
if "WH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_WH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.WHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.WHRange [1]))
if "ZH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_ZH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.ZHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.ZHRange [1]))
if "ttH" in self.modes: self.modelBuilder.doVar("r_ttH[1,%s,%s]" % (self.ttHRange
,вҶ’ [0], self.ttHRange[1]))
poi = ",".join(["r_"+m for m in self.modes])
if self.pois: poi = self.pois
...

Each of these is a parameter of interest in the statistical model that COMBINE constructs. The
arrays ggHRange, qqHRange, VHRange, WHRange, ZHRange and ttHRange specify the range
of each parameter of interest and are defined in the same Python class. The association of each
parameter of interest with each production process is defined in the following function:
def getHiggsSignalYieldScale(self,production,decay, energy):
if production == "ggH": return ("r_ggH" if "ggH" in self.modes else 1)
if production == "qqH": return ("r_qqH" if "qqH" in self.modes else 1)
if production in [ "WH", "ZH", "VH" ]: return ("r_VH" if "VH" in self.modes else
,вҶ’ 1)
if production == "ttH": return ("r_ttH" if "ttH" in self.modes else ("r_ggH" if
,вҶ’ self.ttHasggH else 1))
raise RuntimeError, "Unknown production mode вҖҷ%sвҖҷ" % production

imax 2
jmax 2
kmax *
-----------shapes * dijet FAKE
shapes * incl
FAKE
-----------bin
incl dijet
observation
166 8
-----------bin
incl
incl
incl
process
ggH_hgg qqH_hgg bkg
process
-1

rate

1.6
140
-----------QCDscale_ggH lnN 1.12
pdf_gg
lnN 1.08
pdf_qqbar
lnN
1.025
bg_incl
lnN
1.05

dijet
dijet
dijet
ggH_hgg qqH_hgg bkg
-1

0.4
0.95
3.2
1.12
1.08
-

1.025
-

-

An example datacard with two signal processes and two channels for use with PhysicsMode
l:floatingXSHiggs is shown in Datacard 5. In this datacard, there are two signal processes,
ggH hgg and qqH hgg, that correspond to Higgs boson production in the gluon fusion and
vector boson fusion modes, respectively, decaying to two photons. The background process
is estimated by fitting the data outside the signal peak. The channels correspond to events
with an additional pair of jets reconstructed (dijet) or otherwise, leading to a more inclusive
channel (incl). The FAKE directive in lines 5 and 6 are used to indicate that each channel of the
counting analysis datacard represents a single bin in a histogram. This is required in counting
analysis datacards to run some of the diagnostic methods described in Section 6.8, and does
not change the statistical model constructed by COMBINE.
It is possible to include generic constraints on the parameters of the physics model. These can
be included in the datacard with lines having the following syntax:
<name> constr <formula> <args> <delta>

where name should be a unique identifier for the constraint and formula and args follow the
ROOT TFormula syntax. The result is to multiply the probability term p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in Eq. (1) by
the product of constraint terms,
пЈ«

p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) вҶ’ p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) вҲҸ
l

вҲҡ e
Оҙl 2ПҖ

пЈ¶2

gl (вғ—Вө)
пЈё
вҲ’ 12 пЈӯ
Оҙl

,

(22)

where l runs over the constr lines in the datacard. This feature can be used to include additional restrictions on the parameters of the model imposed by external theoretical or experimental constraints. This feature has been used to perform regularization in measurements of
unfolded differential Higgs boson cross sections in the H вҶ’ П„П„ decay mode [32]. As an example, the following datacard line produces a single constraint term in the statistical model with
g(вғ—Вө) = rggH вҲ’ 2rVH + rП„ П„H and Оҙ = 0.03, when used with the PhysicsModel:floatingXSHiggs
physics model:

The order of the list of parameters in the fourth column of the datacard line defines which of
the parameters is assigned to each term in g(вғ—Вө).
Throughout this paper, Вө generically denotes the first parameter of interest defined in the
physics model, while r specifically refers to the single parameter of interest in the default
physics model. For any physics model, it is possible to redefine the list of parameters of interest,
or their order within the list, using the COMBINE command line option --redefineSignalPOIs.
Parameters of interest not included in this list are demoted to nuisance parameters. This command may include nuisance parameters, which results in the removal of the probability density in the statistical model for the associated auxiliary observable. This can be used to test how
well any parameter of the model can be measured using only the primary observables, and any
remaining auxiliary observables of a given data set.

How to run COMBINE

This section gives an overview of the command line executable combine provided by the package, which is used to perform a number of different statistical routines using the statistical
model constructed by COMBINE. The executable runs using the command:
$ combine <datacard.[txt|root]> -M <Method>

Where the Method specifies the statistical calculation to be performed. A list of available options for the executable is displayed by adding the command line option --help.

6.1

Generic minimizer options

A number of methods available in COMBINE make use of numerical optimization of the likelihood function given in Eq. (2). Typically, these methods make use of the profile negative-loglikelihood function, вҲ’ ln L(вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (вғ—Вө)), in which the nuisance parameters are profiled; вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (вғ—Вө) are
the values of the nuisance parameters ОҪ that maximize the likelihood function at a fixed set of
values of the parameters of interest вғ—Вө. The class CascadeMinimizer is used to steer these
routines and allows for a sequential minimization of вҲ’ ln L(вғ—ОҰ) using different algorithms. The
class also allows for COMBINE to perform minimization over any discrete nuisance parameters
like those needed for the implementation of the discrete profiling method described in Ref. [33].
The combinations of minimizers and algorithms supported in COMBINE are given in Table 4.
Details of these algorithms can be found in Refs. [14] and [34].
Table 4: Available combinations of minimizer and algorithms in COMBINE.
Minimizer
Minuit
Minuit2
GSLMultiMin

6.2

Reference
[34]
[34]
[14]

Available algorithms
Migrad, Simplex, Combined, Scan.
Migrad, Simplex, Combined, Scan.
ConjugateFR,
ConjugatePR,
SteepestDescent.

BFGS,

BFGS2,

Output from COMBINE

Most of the methods available in COMBINE output the results of the computation to the terminal. In addition these results are also saved in a ROOT file containing a TTree called limit.

6.3

Pseudo-data generation

The name of this file has the following format:
higgsCombine$NAME.MethodName.mH$MASS.[$WORD$VALUE].root

where NAME is set to the value passed to the option -n, which defaults to Test, and $WORD$VALUE
is any user-defined keyword WORD in the datacard that has been set to a particular value VALUE
using the command line option --keyword-value WORD=VALUE. The option can be repeated
multiple times for multiple keywords. The keyword-value pairs are also stored in the output
ROOT file. The option -m sets the value of $MASS and the parameter MH if it is included in the
statistical model. Its value is written to the branch mh in the output TTree object.
The structure of the TTree contained in the output ROOT file is given in Table 5. The branch
names limit and limitErr always refer to the main result of any statistical routine and an
estimate of its uncertainty, whether or not that routine calculates a frequentist limit.
Table 5: TTree branches contained in the output ROOT file from COMBINE.
Branch name
limit
limitErr
mh

Type
Double t
Double t
Double t

iToy
iSeed
t cpu
t real
quantileExpected

Int t
Int t
Float t
Float t
Float t

6.3

Description
Main result of the statistical routine being performed.
Estimated uncertainty in the result.
Value specified with --mass command line option.
The default value is 120.
Pseudo-data set identifier if running with --toys.
Random seed specified with -s.
Estimated processing time.
Elapsed wall-clock time for routine.
Quantile identifier for methods that calculate expected and observed results. The meaning is methoddependent. Negative values are reserved for entries
that are not related to quantiles of a calculation. The
default is set to вҲ’1 and specifies that the entry corresponds to the result obtained from the observed data.

Pseudo-data generation

By default, COMBINE performs the calculation using the observed data. For example, in frequentist methods the observed data are automatically used to construct the likelihood function
in Eq. (2). It is possible to run these routines instead using pseudo-data sets to determine the
distributions of various statistical quantities such as maximum likelihood estimates, or perform
optimization studies that are blind to the observed data.
The option --toys is used to instruct COMBINE to first generate one or more pseudo-data sets,
which are used in place of the observed data. There are two variants of this procedure available
in COMBINE. In the first, specified by --toys <N> with N > 0, COMBINE generates N pseudodata sets from the statistical model and runs the specified statistical routine once per data set.
The pseudo-data set is constructed by generating random values of the observables вғ—x. The
random number seed for the generation can be modified with the option --seed <value>,
which allows the user to ensure each run of the COMBINE command produces different pseudodata sets, or identical pseudo-data sets. This allows certain calculations to be split into parallel
tasks in the former case and for performing diagnostic studies in particular pseudo-data sets
in the latter. The output TTree contains one entry for each of these data sets when generated
with N > 0.

In the second variant, specifying --toys -1 produces an Asimov data set [35]. An Asimov
data set is defined as that in which the maximum likelihood estimates for all of the model
parameters are equal to the values used to generate the data set. Asimov data sets are used
for deriving the expected outcome of frequentist calculations such as in the determination of
upper limits and confidence intervals. Where valid, their use makes these calculations much
more computationally efficient than using the first variant of pseudo-data generation.
In COMBINE, Asimov data sets are constructed using the expectation value for the probability p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ) in counting analyses and shape analyses for which the data are binned, or
by using a large sample of weighted events, which are generated according to p(вғ—x; вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪ). In
the former case, the values of nb for the Poisson probabilities in Eq. (10) are allowed to be
non-integer, since the terms nb ! are ignored when constructing a likelihood for the statistical
routines available in COMBINE. The event weights in the latter case are identical for every
event in the same channel, and are accounted for when estimating parameter uncertainties
from Asimov data sets [36]. The default values of the parameters of interest are used when
generating pseudo-data sets in both variants. The command line option --setParameters
<x>=<value x>,<y>=<value y>,... can be used to specify other values of the parameters
to be used for the generation of the pseudo-data sets.
By default, pseudo-data sets in COMBINE make use of marginalization where the value of
each nuisance parameter ОҪk is randomly sampled from its probability distribution p(ОҪk |yk ) in
Eq. (3) before generating values for the primary observables in each pseudo-data set. The auxiliary observables вғ—y are set to their default values. This can be modified by specifying the
option --toysFrequentist. With this option and N > 0, a parametric bootstrap [37, 38]
is instead performed: each y is generated according to its probability distribution p(y; ОҪ),
where the value of the nuisance parameter ОҪ is set to the maximum likelihood estimate obtained using the observed data and fixing the parameters of interest to the values specified
in the --setParameters option. If instead N = вҲ’1, the value of y is this maximum likelihood estimate for the corresponding nuisance parameter ОҪ. When specifying the option
--bypassFrequentistFit, the default values of the nuisance parameters instead of the
maximum likelihood estimates are used.
It is possible to separate the tasks of generating the pseudo-data sets from running statistical
routines, by first saving the pseudo-data sets to a ROOT file on disk, and then passing them to
any COMBINE method later. The following sections describe the most commonly used statistical methods available in COMBINE. These represent only part of the functionality of the tool
and users are recommended to consult the online documentation for a full description of its
capabilities.

6.4

Frequentist limits and confidence intervals

The HybridNew method can be used for calculating upper limits with statistical models created
with the default physics model, and for calculating confidence intervals for models with one or
more parameters of interest using the FeldmanвҖ“Cousins procedure [39]. Each of these methods
utilizes a test statistic based on the likelihood function given in Eq. (2).
In the case of upper limits, the single parameter of interest Вө corresponds to the parameter
r in the default physics model. A number of prescriptions using different test statistics are
supported in COMBINE as follows:

вҖў LEP-style: --testStat LEP --generateNuisances=1 --fitNuisances=0.

6.4

Frequentist limits and confidence intervals

The test statistic is defined using the ratio of likelihoods,


L(Вө = 0, вғ—ОҪ0 )
qLEP (Вө) = вҲ’2 ln
,
L(Вө, вғ—ОҪ0 )

(23)

where вғ—ОҪ0 are the default values of the nuisance parameters. This test statistic was
used in the searches for the Higgs boson at the LEP [40].
вҖў TEV-style: --testStat TEV --generateNuisances=0 --generateExterna
lMeasurements=1 --fitNuisances=1. The test statistic is defined using a ratio
of profile likelihoods,
!
L(Вө = 0, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (0))
,
(24)
qTEV (Вө) = вҲ’2 ln
L(Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө))
where вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (0), and вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө) are the values of the nuisance parameters that maximize the
likelihood function at Вө = 0 and Вө respectively. For the purposes of pseudo-data
generation, the nuisance parameters are set to the values of вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө) obtained using the
observed data, while the values of вғ—y are randomly sampled according to their probability densities. This test statistic was used in the context of Higgs boson searches
at the Tevatron [41].
вҖў LHC-style: --LHCmode LHC-limits. The test statistic is defined using a ratio of
profile likelihoods,
пЈұ
!
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
L(Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө))
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
вҲ’2 ln
if 0 вүӨ ВөМӮ вүӨ Вө,
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
L(ВөМӮ, вғ—ОҪЛҶ )
пЈІ
!
qeLHC (Вө) =
(25)
L(
Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө))
пЈҙ
вҲ’2 ln
if ВөМӮ < 0,
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
ЛҶ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
L(0, вғ—ОҪЛҶ (0))
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі0
if ВөМӮ > Вө,
where ВөМӮ is the maximum likelihood estimator for Вө. The same result is obtained with
the option --testStat LHC --generateNuisances=0 --generateExterna
lMeasurements=1 --fitNuisances=1. The values of the nuisance parameters
вғ—ОҪ that maximize the likelihood L assuming a specific value of Вө and for Вө = ВөМӮ are
ЛҶ respectively.
denoted вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө) and вғ—ОҪ,
The test statistic in Eq. (25) is the most widely used for setting upper limits in searches for new
physics at the LHC [3]. In COMBINE, these test statistics can be modified to perform two point
hypothesis tests such as those performed to test different hypotheses for the spin and parity
of the Higgs boson [42]. In the LEP-style prescription, the nuisance parameter values for each
pseudo-data set are randomly sampled from their distributions p(ОҪk |yk ) in Eq. (3). In the TEVand LHC-style prescriptions, a parametric bootstrap is used where the nuisance parameters are
set to the values of вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (Вө) obtained using the observed data before generating the primary and
auxiliary observables from their probability distributions. It is also possible to integrate out
(marginalize) the nuisance parameters in a Bayesian-inspired procedure [43] and advocated
for upper limits in high-energy physics analyses [44]. This amounts to calculating

Lint (вғ—Вө) =

Z

L(вғ—ОҰ) вҲҸ ПҖk (ОҪk )dвғ—ОҪ,
k

(26)

where Lint (вғ—Вө) is the integrated likelihood [43]. In COMBINE, this is achieved by modifying the
options to --generateNuisances=1 and --generateExternalMeasurements=0. This
is required to calculate upper limits in cases where there are few or no background events in
channels dominated by signal processes such as in the search for lepton flavor violating tau
lepton decays performed by the CMS Collaboration [45].
For a specific value of Вө, the value of the test statistic using the observed data qobs (Вө) is calculated, along with the two p-values pВө and pb defined as
(R вҲһ
pВө =
and

qobs (Вө)

f (qx (Вө)|Вө) dqx

if x=LHC,

вҲ’вҲһ

f (qx (Вө)|Вө) dqx

if x=TEV or LEP,

f (qx (Вө)|0) dqx
f (qx (Вө)|0) dqx
qobs (Вө)

if x=LHC,
if x=TEV or LEP,

R qxobs
x (Вө)
(R qobs (Вө)
x

pb =

R0вҲһ
x

(27)

(28)

where the distributions of the test statistics f (qx (Вө)|Вө) and f (qx (Вө)|0) are determined using
pseudo-data sets, assuming the value of Вө indicated and the values of вғ—ОҪ and вғ—y depending on
the options used, as described above. From these p-values, the tool calculates the CLs criterion [20, 46, 47] defined by CLs = pВө /(1 вҲ’ pb ). The tool then uses a bisection algorithm to find
the value of Вө for which CLs = Оұ corresponding to the upper limit on Вө at the 100(1 вҲ’ Оұ)%
confidence level (CL). The tool can also calculate the median, and 2.5, 16, 85, or 97.5% quantiles of the expected distribution of the upper limit assuming Вө = 0, by including the option
--expectedFromGrid=<X>, where X is either 0.5, 0.025, 0.16, 0.84, or 0.975, respectively.
The 95% CL upper limit on Вө in the example template analysis can be calculated using Datacard 2 with the command:
$ combine datacard-2-template-analysis.txt -M HybridNew --LHCmode LHC-limits --rMax
,вҶ’ 2.0 --clsAcc 0.01

The option --rMax specifies the maximum value of Вө in the algorithm that performs the search
for the upper limit. The results of the calculation are output to the terminal as:
> -- Hybrid New -> Limit: r < 0.346362 +/- 0.0134581 @ 95% CL
> Done in 0.31 min (cpu), 0.32 min (real)

The bisection algorithm for calculating the upper limit terminates when the estimate of the
precision on the upper limit value is below a specified threshold, or when the precision cannot
be improved further. The user can specify the following options to control this behavior:

вҖў --rAbsAcc and --rRelAcc: Define the accuracy on the upper limit, Вөup at which
the algorithm terminates. The default values are 0.1 and 0.05 respectively, meaning
that the search terminates when the absolute accuracy вҲҶВөup < 0.1 or the relative
accuracy вҲҶВөup /Вөup < 0.05, where вҲҶВөup is the estimated uncertainty on the upper
limit.
вҖў --clsAcc: Determines the absolute accuracy up to which the value of CLs (or pВө )
values are computed when searching for the upper limit. The default is 0.5%.
вҖў -T or --toysH: Determines the minimum number of pseudo-data sets that are generated for each value of Вө with a default value of 500.

6.4

Frequentist limits and confidence intervals

f(qLHC)

The distributions of the test statistic for the pseudo-data sets generated assuming each value
of Вө that is tested during the bisection algorithm and Вө = 0 can be saved in the output file
by specifying the option --saveHybridResult. Figure 3 shows the distributions of the test
statistic qeLHC (Вө = 0.4) for Вө = 0 and 0.4 in pseudo-data sets obtained with Datacard 2.

102
101
100
10 1
10 2
10 3
10 4
10 5
10 6

CMS

f(qLHC( = 0.4)| = 0.4)
f(qLHC( = 0.4)| = 0)
obs ( = 0.4)
qLHC

p
1 pb

qLHC( = 0.4)

Figure 3: Distributions of qeLHC (Вө = 0.4) from 100,000 pseudo-data sets for Вө = 0 (red histogram) and Вө = 0.4 (blue histogram) using the analysis described in Datacard 2. The observed
value of the test statistic is indicated by the black vertical line and the regions used to determine
1 вҲ’ pb and pВө are indicated by the pink hatched and light blue shaded regions, respectively.
To further improve the accuracy when searching for the upper limit, COMBINE interpolates
across several results to estimate Вөup . The interpolation uses an exponential function that is
fit to the set of results that are closest to the chosen CL and the range in Вө used for the fit is
determined by the accuracy specified in the command line. A plot of the calculated CLs value
as a function of Вө can be produced using the option --plot=name.png. Figure 4 shows the
calculation of the upper limit at the 95% CL using the CLs criterion with Datacard 2.
The AsymptoticLimits method can be used to calculate the upper limits in statistical models
that use the default physics model with the LHC-style prescription. This is the default method
that will be run if the command line option -M is not specified. In this method, the limit calculation relies on asymptotic approximations for the distributions of the qeLHC (Вө), following the
prescription described in Ref. [35]. The tool also calculates the median and 2.5, 16, 85 and 97.5%
quantiles of the expected distribution of the upper limit assuming Вө = 0, using an Asimov data
set. The output TTree contains an entry for each of these results, which can be identified by
the quantileExpected branch.
By default upper limits are calculated at the 95% CL (Оұ = 0.05). This can be modified using
the option --cl=<X> where X is (1 вҲ’ Оұ). Upper limits are calculated using the CLs criterion
by default. Alternatively, it is possible to only use pВө by specifying the option --rule Pmu in
the command line. It is also possible to calculate the values of CLs and pВө for a single value
of Вө, bypassing the bisection algorithm, by specifying --singlePoint <r>, where r is the
desired value of Вө.
The HybridNew method can also be used to compute FeldmanвҖ“Cousins intervals by specifying the option --LHCmode LHC-feldman-cousins. This method allows for calculating

0.25
CLs

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Figure 4: Calculated CLs as a function of Вө, used to determine the 95% CL upper limit for
Datacard 2. The solid red line is used to interpolate the CLs values to find the crossing at 0.05,
and the shaded band indicates the uncertainty in the interpolation that is used to estimate an
uncertainty in the upper limit. The vertical dashed blue lines show the derived upper limit and
the estimated uncertainty due to the number of pseudo-data sets used in the calculation.
confidence intervals with accurate coverage both in scenarios with low event counts or where
physical boundaries are placed on the parameters of interest Вө. For example, this method has
been used in Higgs boson property measurements at CMS [48]. The following procedure can be
used to produce one-dimensional confidence intervals or multidimensional confidence regions
for physics models with multiple parameters of interest:

вҖў For each parameter point, run the HybridNew method with the option --LHCmode
LHC-feldman-cousins --singlePoint <mu1>=<v1>,<mu2>=<v2>,<mu3>=
<v3>,... --saveHybridResult to generate the distributions of the test statistic
!
L(вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (вғ—Вө))
qFC (вғ—Вө) = -2 ln
,
(29)
Lв„Ұ (вғ—ВөЛҶ , вғ—ОҪЛҶ )
where вғ—Вө = Вө1 , Вө2 , ... are the parameters of interest and Lв„Ұ (вғ—ВөЛҶ , вғ—ОҪЛҶ ) indicates the maximum of the likelihood function within the bounded region в„Ұ of its parameters. This
region can be defined using the command line option --setParameterRanges <
mu1>=<mu1min>,<mu1max>:<mu2>=<mu2min>,<mu2max>:... This step also
calculates the value of the test statistic for the observed data qobs
Вө ).
FC (вғ—
вҖў Collect the resulting output files into a single ROOT file and find the set of points
for which
Z вҲһ
f (qFC (вғ—Вө)|вғ—Вө) dqFC > Оұ,
(30)
qobs
Вө)
FC (вғ—

to form the 100(1 вҲ’ Оұ)% CL allowed region.
вҖў The output ROOT file contains the test statistic value for each pseudo-data set as
RooFit RooStats::HybridResult objects. These can be used to determine confidence intervals or contours at different values of Оұ.

6.5

Significance calculation

6.5

Significance calculation

The HybridNew method is also used to calculate the significance of the observed data when
considered against a null hypothesis. For statistical models constructed using the default
physics model, this estimates the significance of the presence of a signal contribution in the
data where the null hypothesis represents the absence of the signal. By specifying the options
--LHCmode LHC-significance, COMBINE generates pseudo-data under the backgroundonly hypothesis (Вө = 0) and evaluates the test statistic q0 defined by


пЈұ
пЈІвҲ’2 ln L(0,вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (0))
if ВөМӮ > 0
L(ВөМӮ,вғ—ОҪЛҶ )
q0 =
(31)
пЈі

otherwise,
for each pseudo-data set. The value of the test statistic for the observed data qobs
0 is also calculated in order to determine the p-value
p0 =

Z вҲһ
qobs

f (q0 |0) dq0 ,

(32)

where f (q0 |0) is the distribution of the test statistic determined using the pseudo-data sets.
Figure 5 shows the observed value of q0 and the distribution of q0 in pseudo-data sets assuming
Вө = 0 for Datacard 3.

CMS
q0obs

p0

f(q0| = 0)

100
10 2
10 4
10 6

q0

Figure 5: Distribution of q0 in 100,000 pseudo-data sets from Datacard 3. The observed value
of the test statistic is indicated by the black vertical line and the region used to determine p0 is
indicated by the light gray shaded region.
The value of p0 and corresponding significance of the signal in the example parametric analysis
can be calculated using 100,000 pseudo-data sets with Datacard 3 using the command line
below:
$ combine datacard-3-parametric-analysis.txt -M HybridNew --LHCmode LHC-significance
,вҶ’ -T 100000 --mass 125

The results are output to the terminal as:

The value of p0 is converted into a significance using a standard normal distribution [20]. The
method Significance can be used in order to speed up the calculation using the asymptotic
approximation for the distribution f (q0 |Вө = 0) given in Ref. [35] thereby avoiding the need
to generate pseudo-data in cases where the number of events in data is large. For the same
datacard, the asymptotic approximation for the significance can be calculated with:
$ combine datacard-3-parametric-analysis.txt -M Significance --mass 125

The result of the calculation using the asymptotic approximation is output to the terminal as:
> -- Significance -> Significance: 2.56729
> Done in 0.00 min (cpu), 0.00 min (real)

The significance result and its estimated uncertainty are stored in the output ROOT file in the
limit and limitErr branches, respectively. Using the --pval option, the p-value is stored
instead of the significance.

6.6

Bayesian upper limits and credible regions

Bayesian calculations in COMBINE are based on the posterior probability p(вғ—Вө) defined by
p(вғ—Вө) =

p({вғ—x }d )

Z

 
L вғ—ОҰ вҲҸ ПҖk (ОҪk )ПҒ(вғ—Вө) dвғ—ОҪ,

(33)

k

where theRindex d runs over the events in the observed data set {вғ—x }d , and p({вғ—x }d ) is defined
such that p(вғ—Вө) dвғ—Вө = 1. The prior term for the parameters of interest ПҒ(вғ—Вө) must be specified
by the user. By default this prior is assumed to be uniform over the ranges ( ai , bi ) specified for
each parameter of interest Вөi ,
ПҒ(вғ—Вө) вҲқ вҲҸ U (Вөi ; ai , bi ).
(34)
i

Bayesian upper limits are calculated in COMBINE using either the BayesianSimple method
for relatively simple statistical models or the MarkovChainMC method for models with multiple parameters of interest or nuisance parameters, which perform the marginalization over
the nuisance parameters. For statistical models with a single parameter of interest Вө, the prior
can be modified via the command line using the option --prior <prior> with the following
options available:

вҖў flat: the default uniform prior.
вҖў 1/sqrt(r): inverse square root prior. This is the Jeffreys prior for the mean of a
Poisson distribution [49].
вҖў Any valid ROOT TMath::Formula expression with @0 as the parameter of interest.
вҖў Any string that names a RooFit RooAbsPdf object contained in one of the input
workspaces. This option can also be used for statistical models with multiple parameters of interest.

6.7

Maximum likelihood estimates and scans

Both methods compute the 100(1 вҲ’ Оұ)% credible upper limit on the parameter of interest Вөup
as
Z Вө
up
p(Вө) dВө = 1 вҲ’ Оұ.
(35)
вҲ’вҲһ

The value of Оұ can be modified by specifying the option --cl=1 вҲ’ Оұ.
The BayesianSimple method computes Вөup using numerical integration, while the Markov
ChainMC method uses Markov chain integration [50].
The number of steps in the Markov chain and number of chains to compute can be specified
via the command line, as well as the number of steps to ignore from the start of the chain. The
user can specify a proposal algorithm by which the Markov chain evolves using the option
--proposal <algorithm> with the following options:

вҖў uniform: Selects the next parameter point in the chain at random.
вҖў gaus: Uses a product of independent normal distributions, one for each nuisance
parameter where the standard deviation of the distribution for each variable is set
to some fraction of the range of the parameter defined by the option --propHelpe
rWidthRangeDivisor.
вҖў ortho: This is the default proposal and is similar to the gaus proposal except that
at each point in the chain, only a single parameter is varied.
вҖў fit: With this proposal, COMBINE computes the Hessian matrix of вҲ’2 ln p(вғ—x; Вө, вғ—ОҪ)
with respect to the nuisance parameters вғ—ОҪ to construct the proposal function. The
accuracy can be improved by including the option --runMinos.
The value of Вөup and an estimate of its uncertainty are obtained from the average over N independent Markov chains, specified by the command line option --tries <N>. The 95%
Bayesian upper limit on the default physics model parameter r for Datacard 1 using 100 Markov
chains can be calculated using the following:
$ combine datacard-1-counting-experiment.txt -M MarkovChainMC --tries 100

These values are saved in the output ROOT file and output to the terminal as below:
> -- MarkovChainMC -> Limit: r < 2.21031 +/- 0.0133576 @ 95% credibility (100 tries)
> Done in 0.05 min (cpu), 0.05 min (real)

If using the MarkovChainMC method, it is also possible to store the resulting Markov chains
in the output file from COMBINE using the option --saveChain. This allows for estimating
the posterior distribution p(вғ—Вө) for one or more parameters of the model and deriving credible
intervals or regions.

6.7

Maximum likelihood estimates and scans

Likelihood-based parameter estimation is performed in COMBINE using the MultiDimFit
method. This method can be used to calculate maximum likelihood estimates for the parameter values and their uncertainties through several different approaches. This method has been
used by the CMS Collaboration to provide measurements in a number of different scenarios,
including Higgs boson production and decay rates, and measurements of the Higgs boson
couplings [51]. The MultiDimFit method is used to evaluate the negative-log-likelihood
function, вҲ’ ln L(вғ—ОҰ), and obtain maximum likelihood estimates and estimates of confidence

intervals for the parameters of interest вғ—Вө using the profile likelihood ratio,
!
L(вғ—Вө, вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (вғ—Вө))
q(вғ—Вө) = вҲ’ ln
,
L(вғ—ВөЛҶ , вғ—ОҪЛҶ )

(36)

where вғ—ВөЛҶ are the maximum likelihood estimates for the parameters of interest, and вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (вғ—Вө) and
вғ—ОҪЛҶ are the values of the nuisance parameters for which L is maximized for a specific set of
parameter values вғ—Вө and for the maximum likelihood estimates вғ—ВөЛҶ , respectively. The process of
finding the parameter values that maximize the likelihood function is typically referred to as a
вҖңfitвҖқ. In Eq. (36) there are two such fits. The one in the denominator is often referred to as the
вҖңoverall best fitвҖқ. The default parameter values are commonly referred to as вҖңpre-fitвҖқ, while
the maximum likelihood estimates are commonly referred to as вҖңpost-fitвҖқ. Throughout this and
following sections, the process of determining the maximum likelihood estimates is referred to
as maximum likelihood optimization so as not to confuse this procedure with the more general
вҖңgoodness of fitвҖқ methods described in Section 6.8.
The following choices for the --algo option are supported in COMBINE:
ЛҶ that
вҖў none: this is the default algorithm. The algorithm finds the parameter values вғ—ОҰ
maximize L(вғ—ОҰ) and reports the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters
of interest. For a model with N parameters of interest, the output TTree contains
N branches, one for each parameter of interest with the maximum likelihood estimates. The output of this algorithm can be used as the starting point for the other
algorithms to reduce their evaluation time.
вҖў singles: the algorithm determines the maximum likelihood estimates for each
parameter of interest Вө and sequentially determines 68% confidence intervals for
each parameter of interest. The output TTree contains one branch for each parameter of interest. One of the entries contains the maximum likelihood estimates with
quantileExpected set to вҲ’1. Two additional entries for each parameter of interest provide the upper Вө+ and lower ВөвҲ’ bounds of the 68% CL interval for that
parameter determined as the range of that parameter for which q(Вө) < 1/2.
вҖў cross: the algorithm determines the maximum likelihood estimates for each parameter of interest and a set of intervals for each parameter Вөl for which q(Вөl ) < 2c , where
RвҲһ
c is determined by c ПҮ2 ( x; n) dx = Оұ and ПҮ2 ( x; n) is a chi-squared distribution with
the number of degrees of freedom equal to the number of parameters of interest n.
The output TTree has one entry with the maximum likelihood estimates for the parameters of interest ВөМӮ, and two entries for each parameter of interest, corresponding
to the points that define the interval.
вҖў contour2d: for statistical models with two parameters of interest, this algorithm
constructs two dimensional contours bounding the regions for which q(вғ—Вө) < 2c ,
RвҲһ
where c is computed from c ПҮ2 ( x; 2) dx = Оұ. The output contains values corresponding to the maximum likelihood estimates with quantileExpected set to
вҲ’1, and additional entries that define the contour. For Оұ = 0.32 the contour produced corresponds to c = 2.3 [20].
вҖў random: in this algorithm, the value of q(вғ—Вө) is evaluated for N uniformly distributed
random points in the space spanned by the parameters of interest. The number of
points is set by the option --points=<N>.
вҖў fixed: in this algorithm, the value of q(вғ—Вө) is calculated at a specified point in the
space spanned by the parameters of interest. The fixed point is specified using the

6.7

Maximum likelihood estimates and scans

--fixedPointPOIs option.

вҖў grid: the value of q(вғ—Вө) is evaluated on a grid of parameter of interest points with N
points in total. The number of points N is specified with the option --points=<N>.
It is possible to partition the scan into multiple runs of COMBINE using the options
--firstPoint <n> and --lastPoint <m>, where 0 вүӨn<mвүӨ N.
The fixed and grid algorithms can be used to evaluate the likelihood function and q(вғ—Вө) for
any value of the statistical model parameters. In each of the above options the value of Оұ can be
defined using the option --cl=1 вҲ’ Оұ. The output TTree branch named deltaNLL stores the
value of q(вғ—Вө). Additional branches can be included to store the values of any nuisance parameter, any RooCategory object, or any RooFormulaVar object contained in the workspace
produced by COMBINE by adding the options --saveSpecifiedNuis, --saveSpecified
Index, or --saveSpecifiedFunc, respectively.
Confidence intervals calculated with COMBINE using these algorithms will yield results with
approximately correct coverage in the absence of large non-Gaussian uncertainties [52вҖ“54]. If
the overall best fit values lie on physical boundaries in the parameter space, the FeldmanвҖ“
Cousins procedure described in Section 6.4 should be used to obtain intervals with improved
coverage properties.
The maximum likelihood estimates for the parameters rggH and rqqH and estimates of their
uncertainties can be obtained using Datacard 5 with the PhysicsModel:floatingXSHiggs
physics model using the commands below,
$ text2workspace.py datacard-5-multi-signal.txt -P HiggsAnalysis.CombinedLimit.
,вҶ’ PhysicsModel:floatingXSHiggs --PO modes=ggH,qqH -o datacard-5-multi-signal.root
,вҶ’ --mass 125
$ combine datacard-5-multi-signal.root -M MultiDimFit --algo singles --mass 125

The output from COMBINE is given below:
> --- MultiDimFit --> best fit parameter values and profile-likelihood uncertainties:
>
r_ggH :
+0.882
-0.749/+0.795 (68%)
>
r_qqH :
+4.683
-2.746/+3.464 (68%)
> Done in 0.00 min (cpu), 0.04 min (real)

For each parameter, the result is presented as a measurement ВөМӮ вҲ’ вҲҶвҲ’ Вө/ + вҲҶ+ Вө, where the
values of вҲҶВұ Вө are determined from the 68% confidence intervals as
вҲҶВұ Вө = |ВөВұ вҲ’ ВөМӮ|.

(37)

The relative precision on rqqH is better than for rggH due to the larger signal to background ratio
in the dijet channel of this datacard. The parameters are correlated due to the contribution
of each process across both channels. This can be seen by considering the shape of the function
q(rggH , rqqH ). Figure 6 shows q(rggH , rqqH ) using the same datacard and physics model. The
points indicate the output from COMBINE using the grid and contour2d algorithms. The
box shown in the figure is constructed from the set of intervals calculated using the cross
algorithm with (1 вҲ’ Оұ) = 0.68.
A subset of parameters for any of the algorithms can be specified using multiple instances of
the option --parameters. In this case, all other parameters of interest are set equal to their
default values throughout the calculation. This behavior can be adjusted by including the option --floatOtherPOI=1, which instructs COMBINE to include the remaining parameters of

interest in the list of profiled parameters for the purposes of the calculation of profile likelihoods. This is not the same as using the --redefineSignalPOIs option as selecting subsets
of parameters does not remove the associated probability distribution p(y; ОҪ) when nuisance
parameters are included. Figure 7 shows the values of q(rggH , rМӮqqH ) and q(rqqH , rМӮggH ) obtained from COMBINE using the grid algorithm, and the 68% CL intervals on each parameter obtained using the singles algorithm. In this case, the options --parameters=<X>
--floatOtherPOI=1 are included where X is either r ggH or r qqH.

CMS

rqqH

q(rggH, rqqH)

rggH

Figure 6: Values of q(rggH , rqqH ) for Datacard 5 in a model with two parameters of interest
rggH and rqqH . The orange scale shows the values obtained in COMBINE at the set of points
indicated by the black dots, using the grid algorithm. The blue box is constructed using the
cross algorithm with (1 вҲ’ Оұ) = 0.68. The white cross and white dots indicate, respectively, the
maximum likelihood estimates for rggH and rqqH from the best fit, and the 68% CL confidence
region obtained using the contour2d algorithm defined as the values of (rggH , rqqH ) for which
q(rggH , rqqH ) = 2.3.

6.8

Goodness of fit tests and diagnostics

The GoodnessOfFit method can be used to perform a test of compatibility between the observed data and the statistical model. While the statistical model constructed by COMBINE is
used as the null distribution, goodness of fit (GoF) tests do not have a well-defined alternative
hypothesis, unlike conventional hypothesis tests.
The GoodnessOfFit method evaluates a test statistic for the observed data and generates
the expected distribution of the test statistic under the null distribution using pseudo-data. In
COMBINE this is done in two separate commands:
$ combine -M GoodnessOfFit <datacard.txt> --algo=<test-statistic>
$ combine -M GoodnessOfFit <datacard.txt> --algo=<test-statistic> --toys <N>

The first command evaluates the observed test statistic and the second determines the distribution of the test statistic under the null hypothesis using pseudo-data sets. The statistical model
parameters used to specify the null hypothesis can be set using the --setParameters option.

6.8

Goodness of fit tests and diagnostics

CMS
= rggH
= rqqH

q( )

0.0

2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
Parameter of interest value

Figure 7: Example of q(rggH , rМӮqqH ) and q(rqqH , rМӮggH ) obtained from COMBINE with Datacard 5.
The points indicate the values at which the functions are evaluated using the grid algorithm,
and the shaded region indicates the 68% CL intervals on each parameter obtained using the
singles algorithm. The horizontal dashed lines indicate the values of q(Вө) used to define
68% and 95% CL intervals.
All of the supported test statistics are based on binned data. For statistical models that include parametric shape analyses, an automatic binning is applied to the data to evaluate the
probability density and calculate the test statistic, unless a specific binning is specified for the
observables using the RooAbsReal::setBinning method. If no binning is specified, 100
uniform bins will be used for each observable. The following test statistics for the --algo
option are supported in COMBINE:

вҖў saturated: evaluates a GoF test statistic defined as
t = вҲ’2 ln

ЛҶ)
L(вғ—ОҰ
,
LS

(38)

where LS represents the likelihood for the saturated model [55].

вҖў KS: evaluates the KolmogorovвҖ“Smirnov test statistic [19, 56, 57], based on the largest
difference between the cumulative distribution function and the empirical distribution function across all bins in all channels.
вҖў AD: evaluates the AndersonвҖ“Darling test statistic based on the integral of the difference between the cumulative distribution function and the empirical distribution
function across all bins in all channels. This test statistic gives more importance to
the tails of the distribution in data [58, 59].
The output TTree contains a branch called limit that contains the value of the test statistic
in each pseudo-data set if running with the option --toys, or from the observed data. These
can be used to determine a p-value under the null hypothesis. Figure 8 shows the distribution
of the saturated test statistic t in pseudo-data sets using the statistical model constructed by
COMBINE from Datacard 2 with default nuisance parameter values. The p-value is 0.73 and
is computed from the distribution and the observed value of t. In this example, the template
analysis in Datacard 2 was used to generate pseudo-data sets and calculate the corresponding

CMS
t obs

0.10

p

f(t)

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

t

Figure 8: Distribution of the saturated test statistic t in 10,000 pseudo-data sets using Datacard 2. The observed value of the test statistic is indicated by the black vertical line and the
region used to determine p is indicated by the light gray shaded region.
generation can be modified using the options described in Section 6.3.
The ChannelCompatibilityCheck method is used to evaluate the compatibility between
measurements of the signal rate in the Nc separate channels defined in the statistical model.
The method can be used with the default physics model and calculates the value of
!
L(rМӮ )
q = вҲ’2 ln
,
(39)
L(rМӮ1 , rМӮ2 , ..., rМӮ Nc )
where each ri , for i = 1, 2, . . . , N, multiplies the rate of all signal processes in a specific channel
i, and rМӮ denotes the maximum likelihood estimate.
The channel compatibility of the multi-signal Higgs boson analysis from Datacard 5 can be
calculated using the command line below:
$ combine datacard-5-multi-signal.txt -M ChannelCompatibilityCheck --mass 125

The output from these commands is given below:
> --- ChannelCompatibilityCheck --> Nominal fit : r = 1.4812 -0.5987/+0.6644
> Alternate fit: r = 3.5554 -1.8576/+2.3619
> Alternate fit: r = 1.1506 -0.6393/+0.6939
> Chi2-like compatibility variable: 1.5417
> Done in 0.00 min (cpu), 0.02 min (real)

in channel dijet
in channel incl

These results are not expected to match those from the maximum likelihood estimates for the
parameters rggH and rqqH as the parameters in that model are related to the process signal
multipliers instead of multipliers for the total signal in each channel. The compatibility variable
in the output is the value of q. Assuming the values of rЛҶi are normally distributed, this quantity

6.8

Goodness of fit tests and diagnostics

RвҲһ

ПҮ2 ( x; Nc вҲ’ 1) dx where ПҮ2 is a chi-squared distribution

can be converted to a p-value p =
with Nc вҲ’ 1 degrees of freedom.

q

The output TTree contains the value of q in the limit branch. If the option --saveFitResu
lt is specified, the output ROOT file also contains two RooFitResult objects fit nominal,
and fit alternate with the results of the two maximum likelihood optimizations used to
calculate the numerator and denominator in q, respectively.
The FitDiagnostics method provides a number of diagnostic routines to investigate the
statistical model. The method can be used with the default physics model and performs two
optimizations of the parameters вғ—ОҰ that maximize the function L(вғ—ОҰ), the first with the parameter of interest r allowed to vary and the second with r set at a constant value of zero. The
output TTree contains the maximum likelihood estimator for r and an estimate of its uncertainty. In addition to the usual output file, an additional ROOT file is produced with the name
fitDiagnostics$NAME.root. This file contains additional details about the optimizations
performed that can be used to investigate the statistical model and the optimization procedure,
the details of which are given in Table 6.
In addition to maximum likelihood estimates for all of the model parameters, these results contain estimates of their uncertainties. By default, the uncertainties for all nuisance parameters
вҲ’1
вҲҶОҪ are estimated as вҲҶОҪk = Hkk
, where Hij is the Hessian matrix of q(вғ—ВөЛҶ ),
Hij =

вҲӮ2 q
,
вҲӮОҪi вҲӮОҪj вғ—ОҰ=вғ—ОҰЛҶ

(40)

ЛҶ are the maximum likelihood estimates of the statistical model parameters. The accuwhere вғ—ОҰ
racy can be improved by including the option --minos all, which determines the uncertainty
for each nuisance parameter as
вҲҶВұ ОҪk = |ОҪВұ вҲ’ ОҪМӮ|,
(41)
where the range (ОҪвҲ’ , ОҪ+ ) is determined as the region for which q(ОҪ) < 1/2, similar to the
singles algorithm described in Section 6.7.
The results contained in this file can be used to study the additional constraints imposed by the
observed data by considering the difference between the maximum likelihood estimates of the
nuisance parameters (вҖңpost-fitвҖқ) and their uncertainties compared to their default (вҖңpre-fitвҖқ)
values.
The FitDiagnostics method can also be used to calculate nuisance parameter impacts [60]
for statistical models with one or more parameters of interest, defined with respect to any
particular parameter of interest Вө for each nuisance parameter ОҪk as

вҲҶВөВұ = ВөМӮ ОҪМӮk Вұ вҲҶВұ ОҪk вҲ’ ВөМӮ,
(42)
where ВөМӮ(ОҪk Вұ вҲҶВұ
k ) is the value of Вө that maximizes the likelihood function when the nuisance
parameter is shifted from its maximum likelihood estimator value by its uncertainty. Large
impacts typically result from nuisance parameters that contribute significantly to the total uncertainty in Вө and the sign of the impact indicates the sign of the (anti-)correlation between
the parameter of interest and that nuisance parameter. These impacts provide diagnostic information that encapsulates both the constraints imposed on the nuisance parameter by the data
and the correlation of that nuisance parameter with a particular parameter of interest. Figure 9
shows the impacts for the default physics model parameter r calculated in the statistical analysis leading to the observation of four top quark production by the CMS Collaboration [22].

nuisances prefit

RooArgSet containing the default values of вғ—ОҪ, and their
uncertainties estimated from their probability distributions.

fit b

RooFitResult object containing the outcome of the
maximum likelihood optimization with r fixed to zero.

fit s

RooFitResult object containing the outcome of the
maximum likelihood optimization with r allowed to
vary.

tree prefit

TTree of default values of вғ—ОҪ and вғ—y.

tree fit b

tree fit sb

TTree of maximum likelihood estimates вғ—ОҪЛҶЛҶ (0) and values
of вғ—y from the maximum likelihood optimization fixing r
to zero.
TTree of maximum likelihood estimates вғ—ОҪЛҶ and values of
вғ—y from the maximum likelihood optimization allowing r
to vary.

Objects below are present only if the option --plots is included.
covariance fit b

TH2D covariance matrix of the parameters from the maximum likelihood optimization fixing r to zero.

covariance fit s

TH2D covariance matrix of the parameters from the maximum likelihood optimization allowing r to vary.

channel observable prefit

RooPlot plot of the probability density, normalized to
the yield in data, projected onto each observable in each
channel along with a histogram of the data. The statistical model parameters are set to their default values.

channel observable fit b

Same as channel observable prefit, except the statistical model parameters are set to their maximum likelihood estimates from the optimization fixing r to zero.

channel observable fit s

Same as channel observable prefit, except the statistical model parameters are set to their maximum likelihood estimates from the optimization allowing r to vary.

These impacts are calculated using both the observed data set (вҖңobs.вҖқ) and an Asimov data
set constructed assuming standard model production of four top quarks to obtain the expected
(вҖңexp.вҖқ) impacts.
By including the option --saveShapes with this method, COMBINE saves additional ROOT
TH1F histogram objects in the output file. These represent the contributions from each process
in each channel of the statistical model evaluated at the default values of the parameters, and
at the maximum likelihood estimates from the two optimizations. This allows a visualization
of the pdfs of the primary observables at the pre-fit and post-fit values of the statistical model
parameters individually for each process and each channel. For statistical models that include
parametric shape analyses, an automatic binning is used to construct the histograms unless
a particular binning is specified for the observables using the RooAbsReal::setBinning
method. If no binning is specified, 100 uniform bins will be used for each observable. The
total signal, total background, and total contributions in each channel are also saved as separate TH1F histogram objects. By adding the option --saveWithUncertainties, the output also includes estimates of the covariance between each of the bin yields, accounting for
any correlations between the parameters of the statistical model. This is achieved using the
RooFitResult::randomizePars() method from the results of the optimization. Figure 10
shows the distribution of the observable x for the data and the background process in Datacard 2 using the default physics model. The uncertainties are estimated by sampling from the
distributions p(ОҪ|y) in the pre-fit case and from the covariance matrix of the model parameters
obtained from a fit to the data shown assuming r = 0 (post-fit). The change in the expected
number of events in each bin О» and their uncertainties вҲҶО» visually indicate the additional constraint imposed by the data on the statistical model parameters.
The FitDiagnostics method can be run with the --toys option such that the process normalization and bin yields in each channel resulting from each of the two optimizations performed using pseudo-data sets are stored, allowing for more detailed studies of the statistical
model.

Summary

After a decade of development, the COMBINE package has become the main tool used for statistical analysis of data by the CMS Collaboration. The tool is based on the ROOT [1], RooFit [2],
and RooStats [2] software packages to provide a command-line interface to several common
statistical workflows used in high-energy physics. The statistical model is constructed from a
text file provided by the user and a configurable physics model that encodes the parameters of
interest and the nuisance parameters that model systematic uncertainties. The COMBINE package can perform a variety of statistical procedures including calculating confidence or credible
intervals, evaluating profile likelihoods, and performing goodness of fit tests. The online documentation [12] contains comprehensive information on the capabilities and instructions for
running the COMBINE package, as well as detailed instructions for its installation.

Acknowledgments
We congratulate our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for the excellent performance of the LHC and thank the technical and administrative staffs at CERN and at other
CMS institutes for their contributions to the success of the CMS effort. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge the computing centres and personnel of the Worldwide LHC Computing
Grid and other centres for delivering so effectively the computing infrastructure essential to

+1 SD impact (obs.)
+1 SD impact (exp.)

-1 SD impact (obs.)
-1 SD impact (exp.)

CMS

b ta gg ing e fficiency (b jets)
b ta gg ing e fficiency ( c je ts, linea r)
JES: Absolute (corr.)
Addition al b jets in tМ… t W
Ad dition al jets in tМ… t W
+0.09

1.10 вҲ’0.09

No rma liza tio n tМ… tZ
Matrix-e leme nt scale var iation s ( tМ… t tМ… t)
b ta gg ing e fficiency (c je ts, qu adratic)
b ta gg ing e fficiency (ligh t)

+0.13

1.37 вҲ’0.13

No rma liza tio n tМ… tW
JES: Relative Sample (2018)
Ad dition al b jets in tМ… t H
MC sta t. in bin 2 of SR-2 в„“ ОјОј tМ… ttМ… t (2017)
JES: Flavor QCD (bottom)
Final-sta te rad iation scale
Matrix-e leme nt scale variation s (tМ… t W )
MC sta t. in bin 3 of SR -3 в„“ tМ… t tМ… t (2016)
In itia l-sta te radiatio n scale (tМ… ttМ… t)
Matrix-e leme nt scale variation s (tМ… t H )
In itia l-sta te radiatio n scale (tМ… tW )

вҲ’2

вҲ’1

вҲ’0.05

(ОҪ-ОҪ0)/ О”ОҪ

0.05

О”r

Figure 9: Example of nuisance parameter uncertainties and impacts calculated in COMBINE for
the observation of four top quark production. Each row gives the name of the nuisance parameter, the difference in its maximum likelihood estimate ОҪМӮ with respect to its default value ОҪ0
relative to its uncertainty вҲҶОҪ, and the impact with respect to the default physics model parameter вҲҶr. The nuisance parameter constraints and impacts are calculated using the observed data
set (obs.) and an Asimov dataset constructed assuming standard model production of four top
quarks (exp.). The red and blue lines in each row represent the positive impact вҲҶr + and negative impact вҲҶr вҲ’ , respectively, for the observed data. Similarly, the red and blue shaded boxes
represent the same quantities for the Asimov dataset. The error bars on the fit constraint values
indicate the ratio of вҲҶвҲ’ ОҪ or вҲҶ+ ОҪ, to their default values. The two numerical values displayed
+вҲҶ+ ОҪ
in the figure give the value of ОҪМӮвҲ’
вҲҶвҲ’ ОҪ for two rate parameters, which do not have well-defined
default uncertainty values. Figure adapted from Ref. [22].

Events / 0.1 units

0.0

0.0
1.25

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

Pre-fit
0.6

Post-fit
0.8
1.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
x = MVA output

Post fit
Pre fit

n

0.2

Вұ Pre fit
Вұ Post fit
Data

1.00
0.75
0.0

0.8

1.0

Figure 10: Distributions of the observable x for the data and background process in Datacard 2
and their uncertainties. The upper panel shows the distribution for the default values of the
nuisance parameters (red solid line, pre-fit) and for the maximum likelihood estimates assuming no signal (blue dashed line, post-fit). The pink hatched and blue shaded bands show the
estimate of the uncertainty in each bin for the pre-fit and post-fit distributions, respectively. The
middle panel shows the difference between the expected number of events in the background
processes (О») and the data (n) in the pre-fit (red solid line) and post-fit (blue dashed line) cases,
and the lower panel shows the ratios of the estimated uncertainties of the post-fit distribution
вҲҶО»Post-fit to the pre-fit вҲҶО»Pre-fit in each bin.

our analyses. Finally, we acknowledge the enduring support for the construction and operation of the LHC, the CMS detector, and the supporting computing infrastructure provided
by the following funding agencies: SC (Armenia), BMBWF and FWF (Austria); FNRS and
FWO (Belgium); CNPq, CAPES, FAPERJ, FAPERGS, and FAPESP (Brazil); MES and BNSF
(Bulgaria); CERN; CAS, MoST, and NSFC (China); MINCIENCIAS (Colombia); MSES and CSF
(Croatia); RIF (Cyprus); SENESCYT (Ecuador); ERC PRG, RVTT3 and MoER TK202 (Estonia);
Academy of Finland, MEC, and HIP (Finland); CEA and CNRS/IN2P3 (France); SRNSF (Georgia); BMBF, DFG, and HGF (Germany); GSRI (Greece); NKFIH (Hungary); DAE and DST (India); IPM (Iran); SFI (Ireland); INFN (Italy); MSIP and NRF (Republic of Korea); MES (Latvia);
LMTLT (Lithuania); MOE and UM (Malaysia); BUAP, CINVESTAV, CONACYT, LNS, SEP, and
UASLP-FAI (Mexico); MOS (Montenegro); MBIE (New Zealand); PAEC (Pakistan); MES and
NSC (Poland); FCT (Portugal); MESTD (Serbia); MCIN/AEI and PCTI (Spain); MOSTR (Sri
Lanka); Swiss Funding Agencies (Switzerland); MST (Taipei); MHESI and NSTDA (Thailand);
TUBITAK and TENMAK (Turkey); NASU (Ukraine); STFC (United Kingdom); DOE and NSF
(USA).
Individuals have received support from the Marie-Curie programme and the European Research Council and Horizon 2020 Grant, contract Nos. 675440, 724704, 752730, 758316, 765710,
824093, 101115353,101002207, and COST Action CA16108 (European Union); the Leventis
Foundation; the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation; the Science Committee, project no. 22rl-037 (Armenia); the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office; the
Fonds pour la Formation aМҖ la Recherche dans lвҖҷIndustrie et dans lвҖҷAgriculture (FRIA-Belgium);
the Agentschap voor Innovatie door Wetenschap en Technologie (IWT-Belgium); the F.R.S.FNRS and FWO (Belgium) under the вҖңExcellence of Science вҖ“ EOSвҖқ вҖ“ be.h project n. 30820817;
the Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission, No. Z191100007219010 and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (China); the Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sports (MEYS) of the Czech Republic; the Shota Rustaveli National Science Foundation, grant FR-22-985 (Georgia); the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), under GermanyвҖҷs Excellence Strategy вҖ“ EXC 2121 вҖңQuantum UniverseвҖқ вҖ“ 390833306, and under project
number 400140256 - GRK2497; the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI),
Project Number 2288 (Greece); the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the New National Excellence Program - UМҒNKP, the NKFIH research grants K 131991, K 133046, K 138136, K 143460,
K 143477, K 146913, K 146914, K 147048, 2020-2.2.1-ED-2021-00181, and TKP2021-NKTA-64
(Hungary); the Council of Science and Industrial Research, India; ICSC вҖ“ National Research
Centre for High Performance Computing, Big Data and Quantum Computing, funded by the
EU NexGeneration program (Italy); the Latvian Council of Science; the Ministry of Education and Science, project no. 2022/WK/14, and the National Science Center, contracts Opus
2021/41/B/ST2/01369 and 2021/43/B/ST2/01552 (Poland); the FundacМ§aМғo para a CieМӮncia e a
Tecnologia, grant CEECIND/01334/2018 (Portugal); the National Priorities Research Program
by Qatar National Research Fund; MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, ERDF вҖңa way of making EuropeвҖқ, and the Programa Estatal de Fomento de la InvestigacioМҒn CientДұМҒfica y TeМҒcnica de
Excelencia MarДұМҒa de Maeztu, grant MDM-2017-0765 and Programa Severo Ochoa del Principado de Asturias (Spain); the Chulalongkorn Academic into Its 2nd Century Project Advancement Project, and the National Science, Research and Innovation Fund via the Program Management Unit for Human Resources & Institutional Development, Research and Innovation,
grant B37G660013 (Thailand); the Kavli Foundation; the Nvidia Corporation; the SuperMicro Corporation; the Welch Foundation, contract C-1845; and the Weston Havens Foundation
(USA).

References

References
[1] R. Brun and F. Rademakers, вҖңROOT: An object oriented data analysis frameworkвҖқ, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A 389 (1997) 81, doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00048-X.
[2] W. Verkerke and D. P. Kirkby, вҖңThe RooFit toolkit for data modelingвҖқ, in Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference for Computing in High-Energy and Nuclear Physics
(CHEP03). 2003. arXiv:physics/0306116. [eConf C0303241, MOLT007].
[3] ATLAS and CMS Collaborations, and LHC Higgs Combination Group, вҖңProcedure for
the LHC Higgs boson search combination in Summer 2011вҖқ, Technical Report
CMS-NOTE-2011-005, ATL-PHYS-PUB-2011-11, 2011.
[4] CMS Collaboration,
вҲҡ вҖңCombined results of searches for the standard model Higgs boson
in pp collisions at s = 7 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 710 (2012) 26,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.02.064, arXiv:1202.1488.
[5] CMS Collaboration, вҖңObservation of a new boson at a mass of 125 GeV with the CMS
experiment at the LHCвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 716 (2012) 30,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.021, arXiv:1207.7235.
[6] CMS Collaboration,
вҖңObservation of a new boson with mass near 125 GeV in pp
вҲҡ
collisions at s = 7 and 8 TeVвҖқ, JHEP 06 (2013) 081,
doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2013)081, arXiv:1303.4571.
[7] CMS Collaboration, вҖңCombined
вҲҡ measurements of Higgs boson couplings in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Eur. Phys. J. C 79 (2019) 421,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-6909-y, arXiv:1809.10733.
[8] CMS Collaboration, вҖңCombined searches for the
вҲҡ production of supersymmetric top
quark partners in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Eur. Phys. J. C 81 (2021) 970,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09721-5, arXiv:2107.10892.
[9] CMS Collaboration, вҖңMeasurement of the top quark
вҲҡ pole mass using tt+jet events in the
dilepton final state in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, JHEP 07 (2023) 077,
doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2023)077, arXiv:2207.02270.
[10] ATLAS and CMS
вҲҡ Collaborations, вҖңCombined measurement of the Higgs boson mass in
pp collisions at s = 7 and 8 TeV with the ATLAS and CMS experimentsвҖқ, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 114 (2015) 191803, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.191803,
arXiv:1503.07589.
[11] ATLAS and CMS Collaborations, вҖңMeasurements of the Higgs boson production and
decay rates and constraints on its
вҲҡ couplings from a combined ATLAS and CMS analysis
of the LHC pp collision data at s = 7 and 8 TeVвҖқ, JHEP 08 (2016) 45,
doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2016)045, arXiv:1606.02266.
[12] CMS Collaboration, вҖңCombineвҖқ. Accessed 2024.
http://cms-analysis.github.io/HiggsAnalysis-CombinedLimit/.
[13] D. Piparo, V. Innocente, and T. Hauth, вҖңSpeeding up HEP experiment software with a
library of fast and auto-vectorisable mathematical functionsвҖқ, J. Phys. Conf. Ser 513
(2014) 052027, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/513/5/052027.

[14] M. Galassi et al., вҖңGNU Scientific Library Reference ManualвҖқ. 3rd edition, 2009.
ISBN 978-0-9546120-7-8.
[15] B. Jacob, G. Guennebaud et al., вҖңEigenвҖқ. Accessed 2024.
https://eigen.tuxfamily.org.
[16] The Boost C++ community, вҖңBoost C++ librariesвҖқ. http://www.boost.org/.
Accessed 2024.
[17] Free Software Foundation, вҖңGNU GzipвҖқ. https://www.gnu.org/software/gzip/.
[18] D. Merkel, вҖңDocker: Lightweight Linux containers for consistent development and
deploymentвҖқ, Linux J. 2014 (2014).
[19] F. E. James, вҖңStatistical methods in experimental physicsвҖқ. World Scientific, Singapore,
2nd edition, 2006. doi:10.1142/6096, ISBN 978-981-270-527-3.
[20] Particle Data Group, R. L. Workman et al., вҖңReview of particle physicsвҖқ, Prog. Theor. Exp.
Phys. 2022 (2022) 083C01, doi:10.1093/ptep/ptac097.
[21] CMS Collaboration, вҖңObservation of Higgs boson decay to bottom quarksвҖқ, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 121 (2018) 121801, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.121801,
arXiv:1808.08242.
[22] CMS Collaboration,
вҖңObservation of four top quark production in proton-proton
вҲҡ
collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 847 (2023) 138290,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2023.138290, arXiv:2305.13439.
[23] CMS Collaboration, вҖңSearch for the standard model
Higgs boson decaying to W + W вҲ’ in
вҲҡ
the fully leptonic final state in pp collisions at s = 7 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 710 (2012) 91,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.02.076, arXiv:1202.1489.
[24] K. Cranmer, вҖңPractical statistics for the LHCвҖқ, in Proc. 2011 European School of
High-Energy Physics, p. 267. 2014. arXiv:1503.07622.
doi:10.5170/CERN-2014-003.267.
[25] R. Barlow and C. Beeston, вҖңFitting using finite Monte Carlo samplesвҖқ, Comput. Phys.
Commun. 77 (1993) 219, doi:10.1016/0010-4655(93)90005-W.
[26] J. S. Conway, вҖңIncorporating nuisance parameters in likelihoods for multisource spectraвҖқ,
in PHYSTAT (2011): Workshop on statistical issues related to discovery claims in search
experiments and unfolding, p. 115. 2011. arXiv:1103.0354.
doi:10.5170/CERN-2011-006.115.
[27] CMS Collaboration, вҖңMeasurements of production crossвҲҡsections of the Higgs boson in
the four-lepton final state in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Eur. Phys. J. C 81
(2021) 488, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09200-x, arXiv:2103.04956.
[28] CMS Collaboration, вҖңEvidence for Higgs boson decay to a pair of muonsвҖқ, JHEP 01
(2021) 148, doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2021)148, arXiv:2009.04363.
[29] R. Barlow, вҖңAsymmetric errorsвҖқ, in PHYSTAT (2003): Statistical problems in particle
physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. 2003. arXiv:physics/0401042. [eConf C030908,
WEMT002].

References

[30] CDF Collaboration,
вҖңA measurement of ПғB(W вҶ’ eОҪ ) and ПғB(Z 0 вҶ’ e + e вҲ’ ) in pp
вҲҡ
collisions at s = 1800 GeVвҖқ, Phys. Rev. D 44 (1991) 29,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.44.29.
[31] K. Cranmer et al., вҖңPublishing statistical models: Getting the most out of particle physics
experimentsвҖқ, SciPost Phys. 12 (2022) 037, doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.12.1.037,
arXiv:2109.04981.
[32] CMS Collaboration, вҖңMeasurement of the inclusive and differential Higgs boson
production
cross sections in the decay mode to a pair of П„ leptons in pp collisions at
вҲҡ
s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 (2022) 081805,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.081805, arXiv:2107.11486.
[33] P. D. Dauncey, M. Kenzie, N. Wardle, and G. J. Davies, вҖңHandling uncertainties in
background shapes: the discrete profiling methodвҖқ, JINST 10 (2015) P04015,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/10/04/P04015, arXiv:1408.6865.
[34] F. James and M. Roos, вҖңMinuit: A system for function minimization and analysis of the
parameter errors and correlationsвҖқ, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10 (1975) 343,
doi:10.1016/0010-4655(75)90039-9.
[35] G. Cowan, K. Cranmer, E. Gross, and O. Vitells, вҖңAsymptotic formulae for
likelihood-based tests of new physicsвҖқ, Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1554,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1554-0, arXiv:1007.1727. [Erratum:
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2501-z].
[36] C. Langenbruch, вҖңParameter uncertainties in weighted unbinned maximum likelihood
fitsвҖқ, Eur. Phys. J. C 82 (2022) 393, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-022-10254-8,
arXiv:1911.01303.
[37] B. Efron, вҖңBootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknifeвҖқ, Ann. Statist. 7 (1979) 1,
doi:10.1214/aos/1176344552. See вҖңRemark KвҖқ.
[38] S. M. S. Lee and G. A. Young, вҖңParametric bootstrapping with nuisance parametersвҖқ,
Stat. Probab. Lett. 71 (2005) 143, doi:10.1016/j.spl.2004.10.026.
[39] G. J. Feldman and R. D. Cousins, вҖңUnified approach to the classical statistical analysis of
small signalsвҖқ, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 3873, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.57.3873,
arXiv:physics/9711021.
[40] LEP Working Group for Higgs boson searches, ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL
Collaborations, вҖңSearch for the standard model Higgs boson at LEPвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 565
(2003) 61, doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(03)00614-2, arXiv:hep-ex/0306033.
[41] CDF and D0 Collaborations, вҖңHiggs boson studies at the TevatronвҖқ, Phys. Rev. D 88
(2013), no. 5, 052014, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.88.052014, arXiv:1303.6346.
[42] CMS Collaboration, вҖңConstraints on the spin-parity and anomalous HVV couplings of
the Higgs boson in proton collisions at 7 and 8 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 012004,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.92.012004, arXiv:1411.3441.
[43] J. O. Berger, B. Liseo, and R. L. Wolpert, вҖңIntegrated likelihood methods for eliminating
nuisance parametersвҖқ, Stat. Scien. 14 (1999) 1, doi:10.1214/ss/1009211804.

[44] R. D. Cousins and V. L. Highland, вҖңIncorporating systematic uncertainties into an upper
limitвҖқ, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 320 (1992) 331,
doi:10.1016/0168-9002(92)90794-5.
[45] CMS Collaboration, вҖңSearchвҲҡfor the lepton flavor violating П„ вҶ’ 3Вө decay in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeVвҖқ, Phys. Lett. B 853 (2024) 138633,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2024.138633, arXiv:2312.02371.
[46] T. Junk, вҖңConfidence level computation for combining searches with small statisticsвҖқ,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 434 (1999) 435, doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(99)00498-2,
arXiv:hep-ex/9902006.
[47] A. L. Read, вҖңPresentation of search results: The CLs techniqueвҖқ, J. Phys. G 28 (2002) 2693,
doi:10.1088/0954-3899/28/10/313.
[48] CMS Collaboration, вҖңMeasurement of the properties of a Higgs boson in the four-lepton
final stateвҖқ, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 092007, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.092007,
arXiv:1312.5353.
[49] H. Jeffreys, вҖңTheory of ProbabilityвҖқ. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 3rd edition, 1961.
ISBN 9780198503682.
[50] L. Moneta et al., вҖңThe RooStats projectвҖқ, in 13th International Workshop on Advanced
Computing and Analysis Techniques in Physics Research (ACAT2010). SISSA, 2010.
arXiv:1009.1003.
[51] CMS Collaboration, вҖңA portrait of the Higgs boson by the CMS experiment ten years
after the discoveryвҖқ, Nature 607 (2022) 60, doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04892-x,
arXiv:2207.00043.
[52] S. S. Wilks, вҖңThe large-sample distribution of the likelihood ratio for testing composite
hypothesesвҖқ, Ann. Math. Statist. 9 (1938) 60, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177732360.
[53] A. Wald, вҖңTests of statistical hypotheses concerning several parameters when the number
of observations is largeвҖқ, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 54 (1943) 426,
doi:10.1090/S0002-9947-1943-0012401-3.
[54] R. F. Engle, вҖңChapter 13 Wald, likelihood ratio, and Lagrange multiplier tests in
econometricsвҖқ, in Handbook of Econometrics, volume 2, p. 775. Elsevier, 1984.
doi:10.1016/S1573-4412(84)02005-5.
[55] R. D. Cousins, вҖңLectures on statistics in theory: Prelude to statistics in practiceвҖқ, 2018.
arXiv:1807.05996.
[56] A. N. Kolmogorov, вҖңSulla determinazione empirica di una legge di distribuzioneвҖқ, Giorn.
Ist. Ital. Attuari 4 (1933) 83.
[57] N. Smirnov, вҖңTable for estimating the goodness of fit of empirical distributionsвҖқ, Ann.
Math. Statist. 19 (1948) 279, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177730256.
[58] T. W. Anderson and D. A. Darling, вҖңAsymptotic theory of certain вҖҳgoodness of fitвҖҷ criteria
based on stochastic processesвҖқ, Ann. Math. Statist. 23 (1952) 193,
doi:10.1214/aoms/1177729437.

References

[59] M. A. Stephens, вҖңEDF statistics for goodness of fit and some comparisonsвҖқ, J. Am. Stat.
Assoc. 69 (1974) 730, doi:10.2307/2286009.
[60] ATLAS Collaboration, вҖңSearch for the bbМ„ decay of the standard model Higgs boson in
associated (W/Z ) H production with the ATLAS detectorвҖқ, JHEP 01 (2015) 069,
doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2015)069, arXiv:1409.6212.

Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
A. Hayrapetyan, A. Tumasyan1
Institut fuМҲr Hochenergiephysik, Vienna, Austria
W. Adam , J.W. Andrejkovic, T. Bergauer , S. Chatterjee , K. Damanakis , M. Dragicevic , P.S. Hussain , M. Jeitler2 , N. Krammer , A. Li , D. Liko , I. Mikulec ,
J. Schieck2 , R. SchoМҲfbeck , D. Schwarz , M. Sonawane , S. Templ , W. Waltenberger ,
C.-E. Wulz2
Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium
M.R. Darwish3 , T. Janssen , P. Van Mechelen
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
N. Breugelmans, J. DвҖҷHondt , S. Dansana , A. De Moor , M. Delcourt , F. Heyen,
S. Lowette , I. Makarenko , D. MuМҲller , S. Tavernier , M. Tytgat4 , G.P. Van Onsem ,
S. Van Putte , D. Vannerom
UniversiteМҒ Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium
B. Clerbaux , A.K. Das, G. De Lentdecker , H. Evard , L. Favart , P. Gianneios ,
D. Hohov , J. Jaramillo , A. Khalilzadeh, F.A. Khan , K. Lee , M. Mahdavikhorrami ,
A. Malara , S. Paredes , M.A. Shahzad, L. Thomas , M. Vanden Bemden , C. Vander Velde , P. Vanlaer
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
M. De Coen , D. Dobur , G. Gokbulut , Y. Hong , J. Knolle , L. Lambrecht , D. Marckx , G. Mestdach, K. Mota Amarilo , A. Samalan, K. Skovpen , N. Van Den Bossche ,
J. van der Linden , L. Wezenbeek
UniversiteМҒ Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
A. Benecke , A. Bethani , G. Bruno , C. Caputo , J. De Favereau De Jeneret ,
C. Delaere , I.S. Donertas , A. Giammanco , A.O. Guzel , Sa. Jain , V. Lemaitre,
J. Lidrych , P. Mastrapasqua , T.T. Tran , S. Wertz
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
G.A. Alves , M. Alves Gallo Pereira , E. Coelho , G. Correia Silva , C. Hensel
T. Menezes De Oliveira , A. Moraes , P. Rebello Teles , M. Soeiro, A. Vilela Pereira5

,

Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
W.L. AldaМҒ JuМҒnior , M. Barroso Ferreira Filho , H. Brandao Malbouisson , W. Carvalho ,
J. Chinellato6 , E.M. Da Costa , G.G. Da Silveira7 , D. De Jesus Damiao , S. Fonseca De Souza , R. Gomes De Souza, M. Macedo , J. Martins8 , C. Mora Herrera ,
L. Mundim , H. Nogima , J.P. Pinheiro , A. Santoro , A. Sznajder , M. Thiel
Universidade Estadual Paulista, Universidade Federal do ABC, SaМғo Paulo, Brazil
C.A. Bernardes7 , L. Calligaris , T.R. Fernandez Perez Tomei , E.M. Gregores
I. Maietto Silverio , P.G. Mercadante , S.F. Novaes , B. Orzari , Sandra S. Padula

,

Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia,
Bulgaria
A. Aleksandrov , G. Antchev , R. Hadjiiska , P. Iaydjiev , M. Misheva , M. Shopova ,
G. Sultanov
University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria

, P. Petkov

, A. Petrov

, E. Shumka

Instituto De Alta InvestigacioМҒn, Universidad de TarapacaМҒ, Casilla 7 D, Arica, Chile
S. Keshri , S. Thakur
Beihang University, Beijing, China
T. Cheng , T. Javaid , L. Yuan
Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Z. Hu , Z. Liang, J. Liu, K. Yi9,10
Institute of High Energy Physics, Beijing, China
G.M. Chen11 , H.S. Chen11 , M. Chen11 , F. Iemmi , C.H. Jiang, A. Kapoor12 ,
H. Liao , Z.-A. Liu13 , R. Sharma14 , J.N. Song13 , J. Tao , C. Wang11 , J. Wang , Z. Wang11 ,
H. Zhang , J. Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
A. Agapitos , Y. Ban , S. Deng , B. Guo, C. Jiang , A. Levin , C. Li , Q. Li , Y. Mao,
S. Qian, S.J. Qian , X. Qin, X. Sun , D. Wang , H. Yang, L. Zhang , Y. Zhao, C. Zhou
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Nuclear Science and Guangdong-Hong Kong
Joint Laboratory of Quantum Matter, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
S. Yang
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
Z. You
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
K. Jaffel , N. Lu
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
G. Bauer15 , B. Li, J. Zhang
Institute of Modern Physics and Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Ion-beam
Application (MOE) - Fudan University, Shanghai, China
X. Gao16
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Z. Lin , C. Lu , M. Xiao
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota, Colombia
C. Avila , D.A. Barbosa Trujillo, A. Cabrera , C. Florez

, J. Fraga

Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia
F. Ramirez , C. RendoМҒn, M. Rodriguez , A.A. Ruales Barbosa

, J.A. Reyes Vega

, J.D. Ruiz Alvarez

University of Split, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Naval
Architecture, Split, Croatia
D. Giljanovic , N. Godinovic , D. Lelas , A. Sculac
University of Split, Faculty of Science, Split, Croatia
M. Kovac , A. Petkovic, T. Sculac
Institute Rudjer Boskovic, Zagreb, Croatia
P. Bargassa , V. Brigljevic , B.K. Chitroda
A. Starodumov17 , T. Susa
University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus

, D. Ferencek

, K. Jakovcic, S. Mishra

,

A. Attikis , K. Christoforou , A. Hadjiagapiou, C. Leonidou, J. Mousa , C. Nicolaou,
L. Paizanos, F. Ptochos , P.A. Razis , H. Rykaczewski, H. Saka , A. Stepennov
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
M. Finger , M. Finger Jr. , A. Kveton
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
E. Carrera Jarrin
Academy of Scientific Research and Technology of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Egyptian
Network of High Energy Physics, Cairo, Egypt
Y. Assran18,19 , B. El-mahdy, S. Elgammal19
Center for High Energy Physics (CHEP-FU), Fayoum University, El-Fayoum, Egypt
M.A. Mahmoud , Y. Mohammed
National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia
K. Ehataht , M. Kadastik, T. Lange , S. Nandan , C. Nielsen , J. Pata
L. Tani , C. Veelken

, M. Raidal

,

Helsinki Institute of Physics, Helsinki, Finland
S. Bharthuar , N. Bin Norjoharuddeen , E. BruМҲcken , F. Garcia , P. Inkaew
K.T.S. Kallonen , T. LampeМҒn , K. Lassila-Perini , S. Lehti , T. LindeМҒn , L. Martikainen
M. MyllymaМҲki , M.m. Rantanen , H. Siikonen , J. Tuominiemi

,
,

Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
H. Kirschenmann , K. Osterberg , M. Voutilainen

Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Lappeenranta, Finland
P. Luukka , H. Petrow
IRFU, CEA, UniversiteМҒ Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
M. Besancon , F. Couderc , M. Dejardin , D. Denegri, J.L. Faure, F. Ferri , S. Ganjour ,
P. Gras , G. Hamel de Monchenault , V. Lohezic , J. Malcles , F. Orlandi , L. Portales ,
A. Rosowsky , M.OМҲ. Sahin , A. Savoy-Navarro20 , P. Simkina , M. Titov , M. Tornago
Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet, CNRS/IN2P3, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, Palaiseau, France
F. Beaudette , P. Busson , A. Cappati , C. Charlot , M. Chiusi , F. Damas ,
O. Davignon , A. De Wit , I.T. Ehle , B.A. Fontana Santos Alves , S. Ghosh ,
A. Gilbert , R. Granier de Cassagnac , A. Hakimi , B. Harikrishnan , L. Kalipoliti ,
G. Liu , M. Nguyen , C. Ochando , R. Salerno , J.B. Sauvan , Y. Sirois ,
L. Urda GoМҒmez , E. Vernazza , A. Zabi , A. Zghiche
UniversiteМҒ de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France
J.-L. Agram21 , J. Andrea , D. Apparu , D. Bloch , J.-M. Brom , E.C. Chabert
C. Collard , S. Falke , U. Goerlach , R. Haeberle , A.-C. Le Bihan , M. Meena
O. Poncet , G. Saha , M.A. Sessini , P. Van Hove , P. Vaucelle

,
,

Centre de Calcul de lвҖҷInstitut National de Physique Nucleaire et de Physique des Particules,
CNRS/IN2P3, Villeurbanne, France
A. Di Florio
Institut de Physique des 2 Infinis de Lyon (IP2I ), Villeurbanne, France
D. Amram, S. Beauceron , B. Blancon , G. Boudoul , N. Chanon , D. Contardo
P. Depasse , C. Dozen22 , H. El Mamouni, J. Fay , S. Gascon , M. Gouzevitch

,
,

Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
I. Lomidze , T. Toriashvili23 , Z. Tsamalaidze17
RWTH Aachen University, I. Physikalisches Institut, Aachen, Germany
V. Botta , L. Feld , K. Klein , M. Lipinski , D. Meuser , A. Pauls , D. PeМҒrez AdaМҒn
N. RoМҲwert , M. Teroerde

,

RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
S. Diekmann , A. Dodonova , N. Eich , D. Eliseev , F. Engelke , J. Erdmann , M. Erdmann , P. Fackeldey , B. Fischer , T. Hebbeker , K. Hoepfner , F. Ivone , A. Jung ,
M.y. Lee , F. Mausolf , M. Merschmeyer , A. Meyer , S. Mukherjee , D. Noll ,
F. Nowotny, A. Pozdnyakov , Y. Rath, W. Redjeb , F. Rehm, H. Reithler , V. Sarkisovi ,
A. Schmidt , A. Sharma , J.L. Spah , A. Stein , F. Torres Da Silva De Araujo24 ,
S. Wiedenbeck , S. Zaleski
RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut B, Aachen, Germany
C. Dziwok , G. FluМҲgge , T. Kress , A. Nowack , O. Pooth , A. Stahl , T. Ziemons
A. Zotz

,

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
H. Aarup Petersen , M. Aldaya Martin , J. Alimena , S. Amoroso, Y. An , J. Bach ,
S. Baxter , M. Bayatmakou , H. Becerril Gonzalez , O. Behnke , A. Belvedere ,
S. Bhattacharya , F. Blekman25 , K. Borras26 , A. Campbell , A. Cardini , C. Cheng,
F. Colombina , S. Consuegra RodrДұМҒguez , M. De Silva , G. Eckerlin, D. Eckstein ,
L.I. Estevez Banos , O. Filatov , E. Gallo25 , A. Geiser , V. Guglielmi , M. Guthoff ,
A. Hinzmann , L. Jeppe , B. Kaech , M. Kasemann , C. Kleinwort , R. Kogler ,
M. Komm , D. KruМҲcker , W. Lange, D. Leyva Pernia , K. Lipka27 , W. Lohmann28 ,
F. Lorkowski , R. Mankel , I.-A. Melzer-Pellmann , M. Mendizabal Morentin ,
A.B. Meyer , G. Milella , K. Moral Figueroa , A. Mussgiller , L.P. Nair , J. Niedziela ,
A. NuМҲrnberg , Y. Otarid, J. Park , E. Ranken , A. Raspereza , D. Rastorguev ,
J. RuМҲbenach, L. Rygaard, A. Saggio , M. Scham29,26 , S. Schnake26 , P. SchuМҲtze ,
C. Schwanenberger25 , D. Selivanova , K. Sharko , M. Shchedrolosiev , D. Stafford,
F. Vazzoler , A. Ventura Barroso , R. Walsh , D. Wang , Q. Wang , Y. Wen ,
K. Wichmann, L. Wiens26 , C. Wissing , Y. Yang , A. Zimermmane Castro Santos
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
A. Albrecht , S. Albrecht , M. Antonello , S. Bein , L. Benato , S. Bollweg,
M. Bonanomi , P. Connor , K. El Morabit , Y. Fischer , E. Garutti , A. Grohsjean ,
J. Haller , H.R. Jabusch , G. Kasieczka , P. Keicher, R. Klanner , W. Korcari ,
T. Kramer , C.c. Kuo, V. Kutzner , F. Labe , J. Lange , A. Lobanov , C. Matthies ,
L. Moureaux , M. Mrowietz, A. Nigamova , Y. Nissan, A. Paasch , K.J. Pena Rodriguez ,
T. Quadfasel , B. Raciti , M. Rieger , D. Savoiu , J. Schindler , P. Schleper ,
M. SchroМҲder , J. Schwandt , M. Sommerhalder , H. Stadie , G. SteinbruМҲck , A. Tews,
M. Wolf
Karlsruher Institut fuer Technologie, Karlsruhe, Germany
S. Brommer , M. Burkart, E. Butz , T. Chwalek , A. Dierlamm , A. Droll, N. Faltermann , M. Giffels , A. Gottmann , F. Hartmann30 , R. Hofsaess , M. Horzela ,
U. Husemann , J. Kieseler , M. Klute , R. KoppenhoМҲfer , J.M. Lawhorn , M. Link,
A. Lintuluoto , B. Maier , S. Maier , S. Mitra , M. Mormile , Th. MuМҲller , M. Neukum,

, N. Shadskiy
, N. Trevisani

,
,

Institute of Nuclear and Particle Physics (INPP), NCSR Demokritos, Aghia Paraskevi,
Greece
G. Anagnostou, G. Daskalakis , A. Kyriakis, A. Papadopoulos30 , A. Stakia
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
P. Kontaxakis , G. Melachroinos, Z. Painesis , I. Papavergou , I. Paraskevas
N. Saoulidou , K. Theofilatos , E. Tziaferi , K. Vellidis , I. Zisopoulos

,

National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
G. Bakas , T. Chatzistavrou, G. Karapostoli , K. Kousouris
E. Siamarkou, G. Tsipolitis, A. Zacharopoulou

,

, I. Papakrivopoulos

University of IoaМҒnnina, IoaМҒnnina, Greece
K. Adamidis, I. Bestintzanos, I. Evangelou , C. Foudas, C. Kamtsikis, P. Katsoulis,
P. Kokkas , P.G. Kosmoglou Kioseoglou , N. Manthos , I. Papadopoulos , J. Strologas
HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
C. Hajdu , D. Horvath31,32 , K. MaМҒrton, A.J. RaМҒdl33 , F. Sikler , V. Veszpremi
MTA-ELTE LenduМҲlet CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group, EoМҲtvoМҲs LoraМҒnd University,
Budapest, Hungary
M. CsanaМҒd , K. Farkas , A. FeheМҒrkuti34 , M.M.A. Gadallah35 , AМҒ. Kadlecsik ,
P. Major , G. PaМҒsztor , G.I. Veres
Faculty of Informatics, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
B. Ujvari , G. Zilizi
Institute of Nuclear Research ATOMKI, Debrecen, Hungary
G. Bencze, S. Czellar, J. Molnar, Z. Szillasi
Karoly Robert Campus, MATE Institute of Technology, Gyongyos, Hungary
T. Csorgo34 , T. Novak
Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
J. Babbar , S. Bansal , S.B. Beri, V. Bhatnagar , G. Chaudhary , S. Chauhan
N. Dhingra36 , A. Kaur , A. Kaur , H. Kaur , M. Kaur , S. Kumar , K. Sandeep
T. Sheokand, J.B. Singh , A. Singla

,
,

University of Delhi, Delhi, India
A. Ahmed , A. Bhardwaj , A. Chhetri , B.C. Choudhary
M. Naimuddin , K. Ranjan , M.K. Saini, S. Saumya

,

, A. Kumar

Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, HBNI, Kolkata, India
S. Baradia , S. Barman37 , S. Bhattacharya , S. Das Gupta, S. Dutta

, A. Kumar

, S. Dutta, S. Sarkar

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Madras, India
M.M. Ameen , P.K. Behera , S.C. Behera , S. Chatterjee , G. Dash , P. Jana
P. Kalbhor , S. Kamble , J.R. Komaragiri38 , D. Kumar38 , P.R. Pujahari , N.R. Saha
A. Sharma , A.K. Sikdar , R.K. Singh, P. Verma, S. Verma , A. Vijay
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-A, Mumbai, India
S. Dugad, M. Kumar , G.B. Mohanty , B. Parida , M. Shelake, P. Suryadevara

,
,

, A. Jaiswal, S. Kumar

,

National Institute of Science Education and Research, An OCC of Homi Bhabha National
Institute, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
S. Bahinipati39 , C. Kar , D. Maity40 , P. Mal , T. Mishra , V.K. Muraleedharan Nair Bindhu40 , K. Naskar40 , A. Nayak40 , S. Nayak, K. Pal, P. Sadangi, S.K. Swain ,
S. Varghese40 , D. Vats40
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune, India
S. Acharya41 , A. Alpana , S. Dube , B. Gomber41 , P. Hazarika
A. Laha , B. Sahu41 , S. Sharma , K.Y. Vaish

, B. Kansal

,

, E. Khazaie46

,

INFN Sezione di Baria , UniversitaМҖ di Barib , Politecnico di Baric , Bari, Italy
M. Abbresciaa,b , A. Colaleoa,b , D. Creanzaa,c , B. DвҖҷAnzia,b , N. De Filippisa,c
M. De Palmaa,b , L. Fiorea , G. Iasellia,c , L. Longoa , M. Loukaa,b , G. Maggia,c
M. Maggia , I. Margjekaa , V. Mastrapasquaa,b , S. Mya,b , S. Nuzzoa,b
A. Pellecchiaa,b , A. Pompilia,b , G. Pugliesea,c , R. Radognaa,b , D. Ramosa
A. Ranieria , L. Silvestrisa , F.M. Simonea,c , UМҲ. SoМҲzbilira , A. Stamerraa,b
D. Troianoa,b , R. Vendittia,b , P. Verwilligena , A. Zazaa,b

,
,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Bolognaa , UniversitaМҖ di Bolognab , Bologna, Italy
G. Abbiendia , C. Battilanaa,b , D. Bonacorsia,b , L. Borgonovia , P. Capiluppia,b
A. CastroвҖ a,b , F.R. Cavalloa , M. Cuffiania,b , G.M. Dallavallea , T. Diotalevia,b
F. Fabbria , A. Fanfania,b , D. Fasanellaa , P. Giacomellia , L. Giommia,b
C. Grandia , L. Guiduccia,b , S. Lo Meoa,48 , M. Lorussoa,b , L. Lunertia
S. Marcellinia , G. Masettia , F.L. Navarriaa,b , G. Paggia,b , A. Perrottaa
F. Primaveraa,b , A.M. Rossia,b , S. Rossi Tisbenia,b , T. Rovellia,b , G.P. Sirolia,b

,
,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Cataniaa , UniversitaМҖ di Cataniab , Catania, Italy
S. Costaa,b,49 , A. Di Mattiaa , A. Lapertosaa , R. Potenzaa,b , A. Tricomia,b,49
C. Tuvea,b

,

INFN Sezione di Firenzea , UniversitaМҖ di Firenzeb , Firenze, Italy
P. Assiourasa , G. Barbaglia , G. Bardellia,b , B. Camaiania,b , A. Cassesea
R. Ceccarellia , V. Ciullia,b , C. Civininia , R. DвҖҷAlessandroa,b , E. Focardia,b
T. Kelloa , G. Latinoa,b , P. Lenzia,b , M. Lizzoa , M. Meschinia , S. Paolettia
A. Papanastassioua,b , G. Sguazzonia , L. Viliania

,
,
,

Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
H. Bakhshiansohi42 , A. Jafari43 , M. Zeinali44
Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
S. Bashiri, S. Chenarani45 , S.M. Etesami , Y. Hosseini , M. Khakzad
M. Mohammadi Najafabadi , S. Tizchang47
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
M. Felcini , M. Grunewald

INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
L. Benussi , S. Bianco , S. Meola50 , D. Piccolo
INFN Sezione di Genovaa , UniversitaМҖ di Genovab , Genova, Italy
P. Chatagnona , F. Ferroa , E. Robuttia , S. Tosia,b

INFN Sezione di Milano-Bicoccaa , UniversitaМҖ di Milano-Bicoccab , Milano, Italy
A. Benagliaa , G. Boldrinia,b , F. Brivioa , F. Cetorellia,b , F. De Guioa,b
M.E. Dinardoa,b , P. Dinia , S. Gennaia , R. Gerosaa,b , A. Ghezzia,b , P. Govonia,b
L. Guzzia , M.T. Lucchinia,b , M. Malbertia , S. Malvezzia , A. Massironia
D. Menascea , L. Moronia , M. Paganonia,b , S. Palluottoa,b , D. Pedrinia
A. Peregoa,b , B.S. Pinolinia , G. Pizzatia,b , S. Ragazzia,b , T. Tabarelli de Fatisa,b

,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Napolia , UniversitaМҖ di Napoli вҖҷFederico IIвҖҷb , Napoli, Italy; UniversitaМҖ della
Basilicatac , Potenza, Italy; Scuola Superiore Meridionale (SSM)d , Napoli, Italy
S. Buontempoa , A. Cagnottaa,b , F. Carnevalia,b , N. Cavalloa,c , F. Fabozzia,c ,
A.O.M. Iorioa,b , L. Listaa,b,51 , P. Paoluccia,30 , B. Rossia
INFN Sezione di Padovaa , UniversitaМҖ di Padovab , Padova, Italy; UniversitaМҖ di Trentoc ,
Trento, Italy
R. Ardinoa , P. Azzia , N. Bacchettaa,52 , D. Biselloa,b , P. Bortignona , G. Bortolatoa,b ,
A. Bragagnoloa,b , A.C.M. Bullaa , R. Carlina,b , P. Checchiaa , T. Dorigoa ,
U. Gasparinia,b , A. Gozzelinoa , M. Gulminia,53 , E. Lusiania , M. Margonia,b ,
A.T. Meneguzzoa,b , M. Migliorinia,b , J. Pazzinia,b , P. Ronchesea,b , R. Rossina,b ,
F. Simonettoa,b , G. Stronga , M. Tosia,b , A. Triossia,b , M. Zanettia,b , P. Zottoa,b ,
A. Zucchettaa,b , G. Zumerlea,b
INFN Sezione di Paviaa , UniversitaМҖ di Paviab , Pavia, Italy
C. AimeМҖa , A. Braghieria , S. Calzaferria , D. Fiorinaa
C. Riccardia,b , P. Salvinia , I. Vaia,b , P. Vituloa,b

, P. Montagnaa,b

, V. Rea

,

INFN Sezione di Perugiaa , UniversitaМҖ di Perugiab , Perugia, Italy
S. Ajmala,b , M.E. Asciotia,b , G.M. Bileia , C. Carrivalea,b , D. Ciangottinia,b , L. FanoМҖa,b
M. Magherinia,b , V. Mariania,b , M. Menichellia , F. Moscatellia,54 , A. Rossia,b
A. Santocchiaa,b , D. Spigaa , T. Tedeschia,b

,
,

INFN Sezione di Pisaa , UniversitaМҖ di Pisab , Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisac , Pisa, Italy;
UniversitaМҖ di Sienad , Siena, Italy
C.A. Alexea,c , P. Asenova,b , P. Azzurria , G. Bagliesia , R. Bhattacharyaa ,
L. Bianchinia,b , T. Boccalia , E. Bossinia , D. Bruschinia,c , R. Castaldia ,
M.A. Cioccia,b , M. Cipriania,b , V. DвҖҷAmantea,d , R. DellвҖҷOrsoa , S. Donatoa ,
A. Giassia , F. Ligabuea,c , D. Matos Figueiredoa , A. Messineoa,b , M. Musicha,b ,
F. Pallaa , A. Rizzia,b , G. Rolandia,c , S. Roy Chowdhurya , T. Sarkara ,
A. Scribanoa , P. Spagnoloa , R. Tenchinia , G. Tonellia,b , N. Turinia,d , F. Vasellia,c ,
A. Venturia , P.G. Verdinia
INFN Sezione di Romaa , Sapienza UniversitaМҖ di Romab , Roma, Italy
C. Baldenegro Barreraa,b , P. Barriaa , C. Basilea,b , M. Campanaa,b , F. Cavallaria
L. Cunqueiro Mendeza,b , D. Del Rea,b , E. Di Marcoa , M. Diemoza , F. Erricoa,b
E. Longoa,b , J. Mijuskovica,b , G. Organtinia,b , F. Pandolfia , R. Paramattia,b
C. Quarantaa,b , S. Rahatloua,b , C. Rovellia , F. Santanastasioa,b , L. Soffia

,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Torinoa , UniversitaМҖ di Torinob , Torino, Italy; UniversitaМҖ del Piemonte
Orientalec , Novara, Italy
N. Amapanea,b , R. Arcidiaconoa,c , S. Argiroa,b , M. Arneodoa,c , N. Bartosika ,
R. Bellana,b , A. Belloraa,b , C. Biinoa , C. Borcaa,b , N. Cartigliaa , M. Costaa,b ,
R. Covarellia,b , N. Demariaa , L. Fincoa , M. Grippoa,b , B. Kiania,b , F. Leggera ,
F. Luongoa,b , C. Mariottia , L. Markovica,b , S. Masellia , A. Meccaa,b , L. Menzioa,b ,
P. Meridiania , E. Migliorea,b , M. Montenoa , R. Mulargiaa , M.M. Obertinoa,b ,

G. Ortonaa , L. Pachera,b , N. Pastronea , M. Pelliccionia , M. Ruspaa,c
F. Sivieroa,b , V. Solaa,b , A. Solanoa,b , A. Staianoa , C. Tarriconea,b , D. Trocinoa
G. Umoreta,b , R. Whitea,b
INFN Sezione di Triestea , UniversitaМҖ di Triesteb , Trieste, Italy
S. Belfortea , V. Candelisea,b , M. Casarsaa , F. Cossuttia
G. Della Riccaa,b

,

Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea
S. Dogra , J. Hong , C. Huh , B. Kim , J. Kim, D. Lee, H. Lee, S.W. Lee
Y.D. Oh , M.S. Ryu , S. Sekmen , B. Tae, Y.C. Yang

,
,

K. De Leoa

,

, C.S. Moon

,

Department of Mathematics and Physics - GWNU, Gangneung, Korea
M.S. Kim
Chonnam National University, Institute for Universe and Elementary Particles, Kwangju,
Korea
G. Bak , P. Gwak , H. Kim , D.H. Moon
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
E. Asilar , J. Choi , D. Kim , T.J. Kim

, J.A. Merlin, Y. Ryou

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
S. Choi , S. Han, B. Hong , K. Lee, K.S. Lee

, S. Lee

, J. Yoo

Kyung Hee University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
J. Goh , S. Yang
Sejong University, Seoul, Korea
H. S. Kim , Y. Kim, S. Lee
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
J. Almond, J.H. Bhyun, J. Choi , J. Choi, W. Jun , J. Kim , S. Ko , H. Kwon
J. Lee , J. Lee , B.H. Oh , S.B. Oh , H. Seo , U.K. Yang, I. Yoon
University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
W. Jang , D.Y. Kang, Y. Kang , S. Kim
I.J. Watson

, B. Ko, J.S.H. Lee

, Y. Lee

, H. Lee

, I.C. Park

,

, Y. Roh,

Yonsei University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
S. Ha , H.D. Yoo
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
M. Choi , M.R. Kim , H. Lee, Y. Lee , I. Yu
College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle East (AUM),
Dasman, Kuwait
T. Beyrouthy
Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia
K. Dreimanis , A. Gaile , G. Pikurs, A. Potrebko

, M. Seidel

, D. Sidiropoulos Kontos

University of Latvia (LU), Riga, Latvia
N.R. Strautnieks
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
M. Ambrozas , A. Juodagalvis , A. Rinkevicius

, G. Tamulaitis

National Centre for Particle Physics, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
I. Yusuff55 , Z. Zolkapli
Universidad de Sonora (UNISON), Hermosillo, Mexico
J.F. Benitez , A. Castaneda Hernandez , H.A. Encinas Acosta, L.G. Gallegos MarДұМҒnМғez,
M. LeoМҒn Coello , J.A. Murillo Quijada , A. Sehrawat , L. Valencia Palomo
Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Mexico City, Mexico
G. Ayala , H. Castilla-Valdez , H. Crotte Ledesma, E. De La Cruz-Burelo , I. HerediaDe La Cruz56 , R. Lopez-Fernandez , J. Mejia Guisao , C.A. Mondragon Herrera,
A. SaМҒnchez HernaМҒndez
Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico City, Mexico
C. Oropeza Barrera , D.L. Ramirez Guadarrama, M. RamДұМҒrez GarcДұМҒa
Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico
I. Bautista , I. Pedraza , H.A. Salazar Ibarguen , C. Uribe Estrada
University of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro
I. Bubanja , N. Raicevic
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
P.H. Butler
National Centre for Physics, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
A. Ahmad , M.I. Asghar, A. Awais , M.I.M. Awan, H.R. Hoorani , W.A. Khan
AGH University of Krakow, Faculty of Computer Science, Electronics and Telecommunications, Krakow, Poland
V. Avati, L. Grzanka , M. Malawski
National Centre for Nuclear Research, Swierk, Poland
H. Bialkowska , M. Bluj , M. GoМҒrski , M. Kazana , M. Szleper

, P. Zalewski

Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
K. Bunkowski , K. Doroba , A. Kalinowski , M. Konecki , J. Krolikowski ,
A. Muhammad
Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
K. Pozniak , W. Zabolotny
LaboratoМҒrio de InstrumentacМ§aМғo e FДұМҒsica Experimental de PartДұМҒculas, Lisboa, Portugal
M. Araujo , D. Bastos , C. BeiraМғo Da Cruz E Silva , A. Boletti , M. Bozzo
T. Camporesi , G. Da Molin , P. Faccioli , M. Gallinaro , J. Hollar , N. Leonardo
G.B. Marozzo, T. Niknejad , A. Petrilli , M. Pisano , J. Seixas , J. Varela , J.W. Wulff

,
,

Faculty of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
P. Adzic , P. Milenovic
VINCA Institute of Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
M. Dordevic , J. Milosevic , L. Nadderd , V. Rekovic
Centro de Investigaciones EnergeМҒticas Medioambientales y TecnoloМҒgicas (CIEMAT),
Madrid, Spain
J. Alcaraz Maestre , Cristina F. Bedoya , Oliver M. Carretero , M. Cepeda ,
M. Cerrada , N. Colino , B. De La Cruz , A. Delgado Peris , A. Escalante Del Valle ,
D. FernaМҒndez Del Val , J.P. FernaМҒndez Ramos , J. Flix , M.C. Fouz , O. Gonzalez Lopez ,

,
,

Universidad AutoМҒnoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
J.F. de TrocoМҒniz
Universidad de Oviedo, Instituto Universitario de Ciencias y TecnologДұМҒas Espaciales de
Asturias (ICTEA), Oviedo, Spain
B. Alvarez Gonzalez , J. Cuevas , J. Fernandez Menendez , S. Folgueras , I. Gonzalez Caballero , J.R. GonzaМҒlez FernaМҒndez , P. Leguina , E. Palencia Cortezon ,
C. RamoМҒn AМҒlvarez , V. RodrДұМҒguez Bouza , A. Soto RodrДұМҒguez , A. Trapote ,
C. Vico Villalba , P. Vischia
Instituto de FДұМҒsica de Cantabria (IFCA), CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain
S. Bhowmik , S. Blanco FernaМҒndez , J.A. Brochero Cifuentes , I.J. Cabrillo ,
A. Calderon , J. Duarte Campderros , M. Fernandez , G. Gomez , C. Lasaosa GarcДұМҒa ,
R. Lopez Ruiz , C. Martinez Rivero , P. Martinez Ruiz del Arbol , F. Matorras ,
P. Matorras Cuevas , E. Navarrete Ramos , J. Piedra Gomez , L. Scodellaro , I. Vila ,
J.M. Vizan Garcia
University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka
B. Kailasapathy57 , D.D.C. Wickramarathna
University of Ruhuna, Department of Physics, Matara, Sri Lanka
W.G.D. Dharmaratna58 , K. Liyanage , N. Perera
CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
D. Abbaneo , C. Amendola , E. Auffray , G. Auzinger , J. Baechler, D. Barney
A. BermuМҒdez MartДұМҒnez , M. Bianco , B. Bilin , A.A. Bin Anuar , A. Bocci , C. Botta
E. Brondolin , C. Caillol , G. Cerminara , N. Chernyavskaya , D. dвҖҷEnterria
A. Dabrowski , A. David , A. De Roeck , M.M. Defranchis , M. Deile , M. Dobson
G. Franzoni , W. Funk , S. Giani, D. Gigi, K. Gill , F. Glege , J. Hegeman
J.K. HeikkilaМҲ , B. Huber, V. Innocente , T. James , P. Janot , O. Kaluzinska , S. Laurila
P. Lecoq , E. Leutgeb , C. LourencМ§o , L. Malgeri , M. Mannelli , A.C. Marini
M. Matthewman, A. Mehta , F. Meijers , S. Mersi , E. Meschi , V. Milosevic
F. Monti , F. Moortgat , M. Mulders , I. Neutelings , S. Orfanelli, F. Pantaleo
G. Petrucciani , A. Pfeiffer , M. Pierini , H. Qu , D. Rabady , B. Ribeiro Lopes
M. Rovere , H. Sakulin , S. Sanchez Cruz , S. Scarfi , C. Schwick, M. Selvaggi
A. Sharma , K. Shchelina , P. Silva , P. Sphicas59 , A.G. Stahl Leiton , A. Steen
S. Summers , D. Treille , P. Tropea , D. Walter , J. Wanczyk60 , J. Wang, S. Wuchterl
P. Zehetner , P. Zejdl , W.D. Zeuner

,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,

Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland
T. Bevilacqua61 , L. Caminada61 , A. Ebrahimi , W. Erdmann , R. Horisberger
Q. Ingram , H.C. Kaestli , D. Kotlinski , C. Lange , M. Missiroli61 , L. Noehte61
T. Rohe

,
,

ETH Zurich - Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics (IPA), Zurich, Switzerland
T.K. Aarrestad , K. Androsov60 , M. Backhaus , G. Bonomelli, A. Calandri , C. Cazzaniga , K. Datta , P. De Bryas Dexmiers DвҖҳarchiac60 , A. De Cosa , G. Dissertori ,
M. Dittmar, M. DonegaМҖ , F. Eble , M. Galli , K. Gedia , F. Glessgen , C. Grab ,
N. HaМҲrringer , T.G. Harte, D. Hits , W. Lustermann , A.-M. Lyon , R.A. Manzoni ,

,
,

UniversitaМҲt ZuМҲrich, Zurich, Switzerland
C. Amsler62 , P. BaМҲrtschi , M.F. Canelli , K. Cormier , M. Huwiler , W. Jin ,
A. Jofrehei , B. Kilminster , S. Leontsinis , S.P. Liechti , A. Macchiolo , P. Meiring ,
F. Meng , U. Molinatti , J. Motta , A. Reimers , P. Robmann, M. Senger , E. Shokr,
F. StaМҲger , R. Tramontano
National Central University, Chung-Li, Taiwan
C. Adloff63 , D. Bhowmik, C.M. Kuo, W. Lin, P.K. Rout

, P.C. Tiwari38

, S.S. Yu

National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan
L. Ceard, K.F. Chen , P.s. Chen, Z.g. Chen, A. De Iorio , W.-S. Hou , T.h. Hsu, Y.w. Kao,
S. Karmakar , G. Kole , Y.y. Li , R.-S. Lu , E. Paganis , X.f. Su , J. Thomas-Wilsker ,
L.s. Tsai, H.y. Wu, E. Yazgan
High Energy Physics Research Unit, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
C. Asawatangtrakuldee , N. Srimanobhas , V. Wachirapusitanand
CМ§ukurova University, Physics Department, Science and Art Faculty, Adana, Turkey
D. Agyel , F. Boran , F. Dolek , I. Dumanoglu64 , E. Eskut , Y. Guler65
E. Gurpinar Guler65 , C. Isik , O. Kara, A. Kayis Topaksu , U. Kiminsu , G. Onengut
K. Ozdemir66 , A. Polatoz , B. Tali67 , U.G. Tok , S. Turkcapar , E. Uslan
I.S. Zorbakir

,
,
,

Middle East Technical University, Physics Department, Ankara, Turkey
G. Sokmen, M. Yalvac68
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Akgun , I.O. Atakisi , E. GuМҲlmez

, M. Kaya69

, O. Kaya70

Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
A. Cakir , K. Cankocak64,72 , G.G. Dincer64 , Y. Komurcu
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
O. Aydilek74 , B. Hacisahinoglu , I. Hos75
H. Sert , C. Simsek , C. Zorbilmez

, B. Kaynak

, S. Tekten71

, S. Sen73
, S. Ozkorucuklu

, O. Potok

,

Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
S. Cerci67 , B. Isildak76 , D. Sunar Cerci , T. Yetkin
Institute for Scintillation Materials of National Academy of Science of Ukraine, Kharkiv,
Ukraine
A. Boyaryntsev , B. Grynyov
National Science Centre, Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology, Kharkiv, Ukraine
L. Levchuk
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
D. Anthony , J.J. Brooke , A. Bundock , F. Bury , E. Clement , D. Cussans
H. Flacher , M. Glowacki, J. Goldstein , H.F. Heath , M.-L. Holmberg , L. Kreczko
S. Paramesvaran , L. Robertshaw, S. Seif El Nasr-Storey, V.J. Smith , N. Stylianou77
K. Walkingshaw Pass

,
,
,

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
A.H. Ball, K.W. Bell , A. Belyaev78 , C. Brew , R.M. Brown , D.J.A. Cockerill ,
C. Cooke , A. Elliot , K.V. Ellis, K. Harder , S. Harper , J. Linacre , K. Manolopoulos,
D.M. Newbold , E. Olaiya, D. Petyt , T. Reis , A.R. Sahasransu , G. Salvi , T. Schuh,
C.H. Shepherd-Themistocleous , I.R. Tomalin , K.C. Whalen , T. Williams
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
I. Andreou , R. Bainbridge , P. Bloch , C.E. Brown , O. Buchmuller, V. Cacchio,
C.A. Carrillo Montoya , G.S. Chahal79 , D. Colling , J.S. Dancu, I. Das , P. Dauncey ,
G. Davies , J. Davies, M. Della Negra , S. Fayer, G. Fedi , G. Hall , M.H. Hassanshahi ,
A. Howard, G. Iles , M. Knight , J. Langford , J. LeoМҒn Holgado , L. Lyons , A.M. Magnan , S. Mallios, M. Mieskolainen , J. Nash80 , M. Pesaresi , P.B. Pradeep,
B.C. Radburn-Smith , A. Richards, A. Rose , K. Savva , C. Seez , R. Shukla ,
A. Tapper , K. Uchida , G.P. Uttley , L.H. Vage, T. Virdee30 , M. Vojinovic ,
N. Wardle , D. Winterbottom
Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom
K. Coldham, J.E. Cole , A. Khan, P. Kyberd , I.D. Reid
Baylor University, Waco, Texas, USA
S. Abdullin , A. Brinkerhoff , B. Caraway , E. Collins , J. Dittmann , K. Hatakeyama
J. Hiltbrand , B. McMaster , J. Samudio , S. Sawant , C. Sutantawibul , J. Wilson
Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA
R. Bartek , A. Dominguez , C. Huerta Escamilla, A.E. Simsek
gas Hernandez

, R. Uniyal

The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA
B. Bam , A. Buchot Perraguin , R. Chudasama , S.I. Cooper
S.V. Gleyzer , E. Pearson, C.U. Perez , P. Rumerio81 , E. Usai , R. Yi

,

, A.M. Var-

, C. Crovella

,

Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
A. Akpinar , C. Cosby , G. De Castro, Z. Demiragli , C. Erice , C. Fangmeier ,
C. Fernandez Madrazo , E. Fontanesi , D. Gastler , F. Golf , S. Jeon , J. OвҖҳcain,
I. Reed , J. Rohlf , K. Salyer , D. Sperka , D. Spitzbart , I. Suarez , A. Tsatsos ,
A.G. Zecchinelli
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
G. Benelli , X. Coubez26 , D. Cutts , L. Gouskos , M. Hadley , U. Heintz
J.M. Hogan82 , T. Kwon , G. Landsberg , K.T. Lau , D. Li , J. Luo , S. Mondal
M. NarainвҖ  , N. Pervan , T. Russell, S. Sagir83 , F. Simpson , M. Stamenkovic
N. Venkatasubramanian, X. Yan , W. Zhang

,
,
,

University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
S. Abbott , C. Brainerd , R. Breedon , H. Cai , M. Calderon De La Barca Sanchez
M. Chertok , M. Citron , J. Conway , P.T. Cox , R. Erbacher , F. Jensen , O. Kukral
G. Mocellin , M. Mulhearn , S. Ostrom , W. Wei , Y. Yao , S. Yoo , F. Zhang

,
,

University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA
M. Bachtis , R. Cousins , A. Datta , G. Flores Avila, J. Hauser , M. Ignatenko
M.A. Iqbal , T. Lam , E. Manca , A. Nunez Del Prado, D. Saltzberg , V. Valuev

,

University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA
R. Clare , J.W. Gary , M. Gordon, G. Hanson , W. Si , S. WimpennyвҖ 

University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
A. Aportela, A. Arora , J.G. Branson , S. Cittolin , S. Cooperstein , D. Diaz
J. Duarte , L. Giannini , Y. Gu, J. Guiang , R. Kansal , V. Krutelyov , R. Lee
J. Letts , M. Masciovecchio , F. Mokhtar , S. Mukherjee , M. Pieri , M. Quinnan
B.V. Sathia Narayanan , V. Sharma , M. Tadel , E. Vourliotis , F. WuМҲrthwein
Y. Xiang , A. Yagil

,
,
,
,

University of California, Santa Barbara - Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, California,
USA
A. Barzdukas , L. Brennan , C. Campagnari , K. Downham , C. Grieco , J. Incandela ,
J. Kim , A.J. Li , P. Masterson , H. Mei , J. Richman , S.N. Santpur , U. Sarica ,
R. Schmitz , F. Setti , J. Sheplock , D. Stuart , T.AМҒ. VaМҒmi , S. Wang , D. Zhang
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA
A. Bornheim , O. Cerri, A. Latorre, J. Mao , H.B. Newman
M. Spiropulu , J.R. Vlimant , C. Wang , S. Xie , R.Y. Zhu

, G. Reales GutieМҒrrez,

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
J. Alison , S. An , M.B. Andrews , P. Bryant , M. Cremonesi, V. Dutta , T. Ferguson ,
A. Harilal , A. Kallil Tharayil, C. Liu , T. Mudholkar , S. Murthy , P. Palit , K. Park,
M. Paulini , A. Roberts , A. Sanchez , W. Terrill
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA
J.P. Cumalat , W.T. Ford , A. Hart , A. Hassani , G. Karathanasis , N. Manganelli
A. Perloff , C. Savard , N. Schonbeck , K. Stenson , K.A. Ulmer , S.R. Wagner
N. Zipper , D. Zuolo

,
,

Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
J. Alexander , S. Bright-Thonney , X. Chen , D.J. Cranshaw
S. Hogan , P. Kotamnives, J. Monroy , M. Oshiro , J.R. Patterson
J. Thom , P. Wittich , R. Zou

, J. Fan , X. Fan
, M. Reid , A. Ryd

,
,

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois, USA
M. Albrow , M. Alyari , O. Amram , G. Apollinari , A. Apresyan , L.A.T. Bauerdick
D. Berry , J. Berryhill , P.C. Bhat , K. Burkett , J.N. Butler , A. Canepa , G.B. Cerati
H.W.K. Cheung , F. Chlebana , G. Cummings , J. Dickinson , I. Dutta , V.D. Elvira
Y. Feng , J. Freeman , A. Gandrakota , Z. Gecse , L. Gray , D. Green, A. Grummer
S. GruМҲnendahl , D. Guerrero , O. Gutsche , R.M. Harris , R. Heller , T.C. Herwig
J. Hirschauer , B. Jayatilaka , S. Jindariani , M. Johnson , U. Joshi , T. Klijnsma
B. Klima , K.H.M. Kwok , S. Lammel , D. Lincoln , R. Lipton , T. Liu , C. Madrid
K. Maeshima , C. Mantilla , D. Mason , P. McBride , P. Merkel , S. Mrenna
S. Nahn , J. Ngadiuba , D. Noonan , S. Norberg, V. Papadimitriou , N. Pastika
K. Pedro , C. Pena84 , F. Ravera , A. Reinsvold Hall85 , L. Ristori , M. Safdari
E. Sexton-Kennedy , N. Smith , A. Soha , L. Spiegel , S. Stoynev , J. Strait
L. Taylor , S. Tkaczyk , N.V. Tran , L. Uplegger , E.W. Vaandering , I. Zoi

,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,

University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
C. Aruta , P. Avery , D. Bourilkov , P. Chang , V. Cherepanov , R.D. Field, E. Koenig ,
M. Kolosova , J. Konigsberg , A. Korytov , K. Matchev , N. Menendez , G. Mitselmakher , K. Mohrman , A. Muthirakalayil Madhu , N. Rawal , S. Rosenzweig ,
Y. Takahashi , J. Wang
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA

T. Adams , A. Al Kadhim , A. Askew , S. Bower , R. Habibullah , V. Hagopian ,
R. Hashmi , R.S. Kim , S. Kim , T. Kolberg , G. Martinez, H. Prosper , P.R. Prova,
M. Wulansatiti , R. Yohay , J. Zhang
Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Florida, USA
B. Alsufyani, M.M. Baarmand , S. Butalla , S. Das , T. Elkafrawy86
M. Rahmani, E. Yanes

, M. Hohlmann

,

University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA, Chicago, USA
M.R. Adams , A. Baty , C. Bennett, R. Cavanaugh , R. Escobar Franco , O. Evdokimov , C.E. Gerber , M. Hawksworth, A. Hingrajiya, D.J. Hofman , J.h. Lee ,
D. S. Lemos , A.H. Merrit , C. Mills , S. Nanda , G. Oh , B. Ozek , D. Pilipovic ,
R. Pradhan , E. Prifti, T. Roy , S. Rudrabhatla , M.B. Tonjes , N. Varelas ,
M.A. Wadud , Z. Ye , J. Yoo
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
M. Alhusseini , D. Blend, K. Dilsiz87 , L. Emediato , G. Karaman , O.K. KoМҲseyan ,
J.-P. Merlo, A. Mestvirishvili88 , O. Neogi, H. Ogul89 , Y. Onel , A. Penzo , C. Snyder,
E. Tiras90
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
B. Blumenfeld , L. Corcodilos , J. Davis , A.V. Gritsan , L. Kang
P. Maksimovic , M. Roguljic , J. Roskes , S. Sekhar , M. Swartz

, S. Kyriacou

,

The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA
A. Abreu , L.F. Alcerro Alcerro , J. Anguiano , S. Arteaga Escatel , P. Baringer ,
A. Bean , Z. Flowers , D. Grove , J. King , G. Krintiras , M. Lazarovits ,
C. Le Mahieu , J. Marquez , N. Minafra , M. Murray , M. Nickel , M. Pitt ,
S. Popescu91 , C. Rogan , C. Royon , R. Salvatico , S. Sanders , C. Smith , G. Wilson
Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA
B. Allmond , R. Gujju Gurunadha , A. Ivanov , K. Kaadze
D. Roy , G. Sorrentino

, Y. Maravin

, J. Natoli

,

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
A. Baden , A. Belloni , J. Bistany-riebman, Y.M. Chen , S.C. Eno , N.J. Hadley
S. Jabeen , R.G. Kellogg , T. Koeth , B. Kronheim, Y. Lai , S. Lascio , A.C. Mignerey
S. Nabili , C. Palmer , C. Papageorgakis , M.M. Paranjpe, L. Wang

,
,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
J. Bendavid , I.A. Cali , P.c. Chou , M. DвҖҷAlfonso , J. Eysermans , C. Freer
G. Gomez-Ceballos , M. Goncharov, G. Grosso, P. Harris, D. Hoang, D. Kovalskyi
J. Krupa , L. Lavezzo , Y.-J. Lee , K. Long , C. Mcginn, A. Novak , C. Paus
D. Rankin , C. Roland , G. Roland , S. Rothman , G.S.F. Stephans , Z. Wang
B. Wyslouch , T. J. Yang

,
,
,
,

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
B. Crossman , B.M. Joshi , C. Kapsiak , M. Krohn , D. Mahon
B. Marzocchi , M. Revering , R. Rusack , R. Saradhy , N. Strobbe

, J. Mans

,

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA
K. Bloom , D.R. Claes , G. Haza , J. Hossain , C. Joo , I. Kravchenko
W. Tabb , A. Vagnerini , A. Wightman , F. Yan , D. Yu

, J.E. Siado

,

State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA

H. Bandyopadhyay , L. Hay , H.w. Hsia, I. Iashvili , A. Kalogeropoulos
A. Kharchilava , M. Morris , D. Nguyen , S. Rappoccio , H. Rejeb Sfar, A. Williams
P. Young
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
G. Alverson , E. Barberis , J. Bonilla , J. Dervan, Y. Haddad , Y. Han
J. Li , M. Lu , G. Madigan , R. Mccarthy , D.M. Morse , V. Nguyen
A. Parker , L. Skinnari , D. Wood

,
,

, A. Krishna
, T. Orimoto

,
,

, M.H. Schmitt

,

University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA
G. Agarwal , R. Band , R. Bucci, S. Castells , A. Das , R. Goldouzian , M. Hildreth
K.W. Ho , K. Hurtado Anampa , T. Ivanov , C. Jessop , K. Lannon , J. Lawrence
N. Loukas , L. Lutton , J. Mariano, N. Marinelli, I. Mcalister, T. McCauley , C. Mcgrady
C. Moore , Y. Musienko17 , H. Nelson , M. Osherson , A. Piccinelli , R. Ruchti
A. Townsend , Y. Wan, M. Wayne , H. Yockey, M. Zarucki , L. Zygala

,
,
,
,

Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
J. Bueghly, S. Dittmer , K.A. Hahn , Y. Liu , Y. Miao
A. Taliercio , M. Velasco

The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
A. Basnet , B. Bylsma, M. Carrigan , L.S. Durkin
nelas , K. Wei, B.L. Winer , B. R. Yates

, D.G. Monk

, C. Hill

, M. Joyce

, M. Nunez Or-

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
H. Bouchamaoui , P. Das , G. Dezoort , P. Elmer , A. Frankenthal , B. Greenberg
N. Haubrich , K. Kennedy, G. Kopp , S. Kwan , D. Lange , A. Loeliger , D. Marlow
I. Ojalvo , J. Olsen , A. Shevelev , D. Stickland , C. Tully

,
,

University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, USA
S. Malik
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
A.S. Bakshi , S. Chandra , R. Chawla , A. Gu , L. Gutay, M. Jones , A.W. Jung
A.M. Koshy, M. Liu , G. Negro , N. Neumeister , G. Paspalaki , S. Piperov
V. Scheurer, J.F. Schulte , M. Stojanovic , J. Thieman , A. K. Virdi , F. Wang , W. Xie

,
,

Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, Indiana, USA
J. Dolen , N. Parashar , A. Pathak
Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA
D. Acosta , T. Carnahan , K.M. Ecklund , P.J. FernaМҒndez Manteca , S. Freed, P. Gardner,
F.J.M. Geurts , W. Li , J. Lin , O. Miguel Colin , B.P. Padley , R. Redjimi, J. Rotter ,
E. Yigitbasi , Y. Zhang
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA
A. Bodek , P. de Barbaro , R. Demina , J.L. Dulemba , A. Garcia-Bellido
O. Hindrichs , A. Khukhunaishvili , N. Parmar, P. Parygin92 , E. Popova92 , R. Taus

,

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA
B. Chiarito, J.P. Chou , S.V. Clark , D. Gadkari , Y. Gershtein , E. Halkiadakis
M. Heindl , C. Houghton , D. Jaroslawski , O. Karacheban28 , S. Konstantinou
I. Laflotte , A. Lath , R. Montalvo, K. Nash, J. Reichert , H. Routray , P. Saha
S. Salur , S. Schnetzer, S. Somalwar , R. Stone , S.A. Thayil , S. Thomas, J. Vora
H. Wang

,
,
,
,

, T. Holmes

,

Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
D. Aebi , M. Ahmad , T. Akhter , O. Bouhali93 , R. Eusebi , J. Gilmore , T. Huang
T. Kamon94 , H. Kim , S. Luo , R. Mueller , D. Overton , D. Rathjens , A. Safonov

,

Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA
N. Akchurin , J. Damgov , N. Gogate , V. Hegde , A. Hussain
K. Lamichhane , S.W. Lee , A. Mankel , T. Peltola , I. Volobouev

, Y. Kazhykarim,

Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
E. Appelt , Y. Chen , S. Greene, A. Gurrola , W. Johns , R. Kunnawalkam Elayavalli
A. Melo , F. Romeo , P. Sheldon , S. Tuo , J. Velkovska , J. Viinikainen
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
B. Cardwell , B. Cox , J. Hakala , R. Hirosky , A. Ledovskoy

,

, C. Neu

Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
S. Bhattacharya , P.E. Karchin
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
A. Aravind, S. Banerjee , K. Black , T. Bose , S. Dasu , I. De Bruyn , P. Everaerts
C. Galloni, H. He , M. Herndon , A. Herve , C.K. Koraka , A. Lanaro, R. Loveless
J. Madhusudanan Sreekala , A. Mallampalli , A. Mohammadi , S. Mondal, G. Parida
L. PeМҒtreМҒ , D. Pinna, A. Savin, V. Shang , V. Sharma , W.H. Smith , D. Teague, H.F. Tsoi
W. Vetens , A. Warden

,
,
,
,

Authors affiliated with an institute or an international laboratory covered by a cooperation
agreement with CERN
S. Afanasiev , V. Alexakhin , V. Andreev , Yu. Andreev , T. Aushev , M. Azarkin ,
A. Babaev , V. Blinov95 , E. Boos , V. Borshch , D. Budkouski , V. Bunichev ,
M. Chadeeva95 , V. Chekhovsky, R. Chistov95 , A. Dermenev , T. Dimova95 ,
D. Druzhkin96 , M. Dubinin84 , L. Dudko , G. Gavrilov , V. Gavrilov , S. Gninenko ,
V. Golovtcov , N. Golubev , I. Golutvin , I. Gorbunov , A. Gribushin , Y. Ivanov ,
V. Kachanov , V. Karjavine , A. Karneyeu , V. Kim95 , M. Kirakosyan, D. Kirpichnikov , M. Kirsanov , V. Klyukhin , O. Kodolova97 , D. Konstantinov , V. Korenkov ,
A. Kozyrev95 , N. Krasnikov , A. Lanev , P. Levchenko98 , N. Lychkovskaya ,
V. Makarenko , A. Malakhov , V. Matveev95 , V. Murzin , A. Nikitenko99,97 ,
S. Obraztsov , V. Oreshkin , V. Palichik , V. Perelygin , M. Perfilov, S. Polikarpov95 ,
V. Popov , O. Radchenko95 , M. Savina , V. Savrin , V. Shalaev , S. Shmatov ,
S. Shulha , Y. Skovpen95 , S. Slabospitskii , V. Smirnov , D. Sosnov , V. Sulimov ,
E. Tcherniaev , A. Terkulov , O. Teryaev , I. Tlisova , A. Toropin , L. Uvarov ,
A. Uzunian , P. Volkov , A. VorobyevвҖ  , G. Vorotnikov , N. Voytishin , B.S. Yuldashev100 ,
A. Zarubin , I. Zhizhin , A. Zhokin
вҖ : Deceased
